TTL
﻿Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the SeasAn Underwater Tour of the WorldJULES VERNETranslated from the Original French by F. P. WalterCopyright (C) 1999, Frederick Paul Walter.A complete, unabridged translation of Vingt mille lieues sous les mersby Jules Verne, based on the original French texts published in Parisby J. Hetzel et Cie. over the period 1869-71.The paintings of Illinois watercolorist Milo Winter (1888-1956) firstappeared in a 1922 juvenile edition published by Rand McNally &Company.VERNE’S TITLEThe French title of this novel is Vingt mille lieues sous lesmers. This is accurately translated as Twenty Thousand Leagues Underthe SEAS—rather than the SEA, as with many English editions. Verne’snovel features a tour of the major oceans, and the term Leagues in itstitle is used as a measure not of depth but distance. Ed.ContentsIntroductionUnits of MeasureFIRST PART1. A Runaway Reef2. The Pros and Cons3. As Master Wishes4. Ned Land5. At Random!6. At Full Steam7. A Whale of Unknown Species8. “Mobilis in Mobili”9. The Tantrums of Ned Land10. The Man of the Waters11. The Nautilus12. Everything through Electricity13. Some Figures14. The Black Current15. An Invitation in Writing16. Strolling the Plains17. An Underwater Forest18. Four Thousand Leagues Under the Pacific19. Vanikoro20. The Torres Strait21. Some Days Ashore22. The Lightning Bolts of Captain Nemo23. “Aegri Somnia”24. The Coral RealmSECOND PART1. The Indian Ocean2. A New Proposition from Captain Nemo3. A Pearl Worth Ten Million4. The Red Sea5. Arabian Tunnel6. The Greek Islands7. The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight Hours8. The Bay of Vigo9. A Lost Continent10. The Underwater Coalfields11. The Sargasso Sea12. Sperm Whales and Baleen Whales13. The Ice Bank14. The South Pole15. Accident or Incident?16. Shortage of Air17. From Cape Horn to the Amazon18. The Devilfish19. The Gulf Stream20. In Latitude 47° 24’ and Longitude 17° 28’21. A Mass Execution22. The Last Words of Captain Nemo23. ConclusionIntroduction“The deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us,” admitsProfessor Aronnax early in this novel. “What goes on in those distantdepths? What creatures inhabit, or could inhabit, those regions twelveor fifteen miles beneath the surface of the water? It’s almost beyondconjecture.”Jules Verne (1828-1905) published the French equivalents of thesewords in 1869, and little has changed since. 126 years later, a Timecover story on deep-sea exploration made much the same admission: “Weknow more about Mars than we know about the oceans.” This realitybegins to explain the dark power and otherworldly fascination ofTwenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas.Born in the French river town of Nantes, Verne had a lifelong passionfor the sea. First as a Paris stockbroker, later as a celebratedauthor and yachtsman, he went on frequent voyages—to Britain, America,the Mediterranean. But the specific stimulus for this novel was an1865 fan letter from a fellow writer, Madame George Sand. She praisedVerne’s two early novels Five Weeks in a Balloon (1863) and Journey tothe Center of the Earth (1864), then added: “Soon I hope you’ll takeus into the ocean depths, your characters traveling in divingequipment perfected by your science and your imagination.” Thusinspired, Verne created one of literature’s great rebels, a freedomfighter who plunged beneath the waves to wage a unique form ofguerilla warfare.Initially, Verne’s narrative was influenced by the 1863 uprising ofPoland against Tsarist Russia. The Poles were quashed with a violencethat appalled not only Verne but all Europe. As originally conceived,Verne’s Captain Nemo was a Polish nobleman whose entire family hadbeen slaughtered by Russian troops. Nemo builds a fabulous futuristicsubmarine, the Nautilus, then conducts an underwater campaign ofvengeance against his imperialist oppressor.But in the 1860s France had to treat the Tsar as an ally, and Verne’spublisher Pierre Hetzel pronounced the book unprintable. Vernereworked its political content, devising new nationalities for Nemoand his great enemy—information revealed only in a later novel, TheMysterious Island (1875); in the present work Nemo’s backgroundremains a dark secret. In all, the novel had a difficultgestation. Verne and Hetzel were in constant conflict and the bookwent through multiple drafts, struggles reflected in its severalworking titles over the period 1865-69: early on, it was variouslycalled Voyage Under the Waters, Twenty-five Thousand Leagues Under theWaters, Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Waters, and A ThousandLeagues Under the Oceans.Verne is often dubbed, in Isaac Asimov’s phrase, “the world’s firstscience-fiction writer.” And it’s true, many of his sixty-odd books doanticipate future events and technologies: From the Earth to the Moon(1865) and Hector Servadac (1877) deal in space travel, while Journeyto the Center of the Earth features travel to the earth’s core. Butwith Verne the operative word is “travel,” and some of his best-knowntitles don’t really qualify as sci-fi: Around the World in Eighty Days(1872) and Michael Strogoff (1876) are closer to “travelogs”—adventureyarns in far-away places.These observations partly apply here. The subtitle of the present bookis An Underwater Tour of the World, so in good travelog style, theNautilus’s exploits supply an episodic story line. Shark attacks,giant squid, cannibals, hurricanes, whale hunts, and other rip-roaringadventures erupt almost at random. Yet this loose structure gives thenovel an air of documentary realism. What’s more, Verne adds backboneto the action by developing three recurring motifs: the deepeningmystery of Nemo’s past life and future intentions, the mountingtension between Nemo and hot-tempered harpooner Ned Land, and Ned’songoing schemes to escape from the Nautilus. These unifying threadstighten the narrative and accelerate its momentum.Other subtleties occur inside each episode, the textures sparklingwith wit, information, and insight. Verne regards the sea from manyangles: in the domain of marine biology, he gives us thumbnailsketches of fish, seashells, coral, sometimes in great catalogs thatswirl past like musical cascades; in the realm of geology, he studiesvolcanoes literally inside and out; in the world of commerce, hecelebrates the high-energy entrepreneurs who lay the Atlantic Cable ordig the Suez Canal. And Verne’s marine engineering proves especiallyauthoritative. His specifications for an open-sea submarine and aself-contained diving suit were decades before their time, yet moderntechnology bears them out triumphantly.True, today’s scientists know a few things he didn’t: the South Poleisn’t at the water’s edge but far inland; sharks don’t flip overbefore attacking; giant squid sport ten tentacles not eight; spermwhales don’t prey on their whalebone cousins. This notwithstanding,Verne furnishes the most evocative portrayal of the ocean depthsbefore the arrival of Jacques Cousteau and technicolor film.Lastly the book has stature as a novel of character. Even thesupporting cast is shrewdly drawn: Professor Aronnax, the careerscientist caught in an ethical conflict; Conseil, the compulsiveclassifier who supplies humorous tag lines for Verne’s fast facts; theharpooner Ned Land, a creature of constant appetites, man as heroicanimal.But much of the novel’s brooding power comes from CaptainNemo. Inventor, musician, Renaissance genius, he’s a trail-blazingcreation, the prototype not only for countless renegade scientists inpopular fiction, but even for such varied figures as Sherlock Holmesor Wolf Larsen. However, Verne gives his hero’s brilliance andbenevolence a dark underside—the man’s obsessive hate for his oldenemy. This compulsion leads Nemo into ugly contradictions: he’s afighter for freedom, yet all who board his ship are imprisoned therefor good; he works to save lives, both human and animal, yet hehimself creates a holocaust; he detests imperialism, yet he layspersonal claim to the South Pole. And in this last action he fallsinto the classic sin of Pride. He’s swiftly punished. The Nautilusnearly perishes in the Antarctic and Nemo sinks into a growingdepression.Like Shakespeare’s King Lear he courts death and madness in a greatstorm, then commits mass murder, collapses in catatonic paralysis, andsuicidally runs his ship into the ocean’s most dangerouswhirlpool. Hate swallows him whole.For many, then, this book has been a source of fascination, surely oneof the most influential novels ever written, an inspiration for suchscientists and discoverers as engineer Simon Lake, oceanographerWilliam Beebe, polar traveler Sir Ernest Shackleton. LikewiseDr. Robert D. Ballard, finder of the sunken Titanic, confesses thatthis was his favorite book as a teenager, and Cousteau himself, mostrenowned of marine explorers, called it his shipboard bible.The present translation is a faithful yet communicative rendering ofthe original French texts published in Paris by J. Hetzel et Cie.—thehardcover first edition issued in the autumn of 1871, collated withthe softcover editions of the First and Second Parts issued separatelyin the autumn of 1869 and the summer of 1870. Although prior Englishversions have often been heavily abridged, this new translation iscomplete to the smallest substantive detail.Because, as that Time cover story suggests, we still haven’t caught upwith Verne. Even in our era of satellite dishes and video games, theseas keep their secrets. We’ve seen progress in sonar, torpedoes, andother belligerent machinery, but sailors and scientists—to say nothingof tourists—have yet to voyage in a submarine with the luxury andefficiency of the Nautilus.F. P. WALTER University of HoustonUnits of MeasureCABLE LENGTH In Verne’s context, 600 feetCENTIGRADE 0 degrees centigrade = freezing water37 degrees centigrade = human body temperature100 degrees centigrade = boiling waterFATHOM 6 feetGRAM Roughly 1/28 of an ounce- MILLIGRAM Roughly 1/28,000 of an ounce- KILOGRAM (KILO) Roughly 2.2 poundsHECTARE Roughly 2.5 acresKNOT 1.15 miles per hourLEAGUE In Verne’s context, 2.16 milesLITER Roughly 1 quartMETER Roughly 1 yard, 3 inches- MILLIMETER Roughly 1/25 of an inch- CENTIMETER Roughly 2/5 of an inch- DECIMETER Roughly 4 inches- KILOMETER Roughly 6/10 of a mile- MYRIAMETER Roughly 6.2 milesTON, METRIC Roughly 2,200 pounds viiiFIRST PARTCHAPTER 1A Runaway ReefTHE YEAR 1866 was marked by a bizarre development, an unexplained anddownright inexplicable phenomenon that surely no one hasforgotten. Without getting into those rumors that upset civilians inthe seaports and deranged the public mind even far inland, it must besaid that professional seamen were especially alarmed. Traders,shipowners, captains of vessels, skippers, and master mariners fromEurope and America, naval officers from every country, and at theirheels the various national governments on these two continents, wereall extremely disturbed by the business.In essence, over a period of time several ships had encountered “anenormous thing” at sea, a long spindle-shaped object, sometimes givingoff a phosphorescent glow, infinitely bigger and faster than anywhale.The relevant data on this apparition, as recorded in various logbooks,agreed pretty closely as to the structure of the object or creature inquestion, its unprecedented speed of movement, its startlinglocomotive power, and the unique vitality with which it seemed to begifted. If it was a cetacean, it exceeded in bulk any whale previouslyclassified by science. No naturalist, neither Cuvier nor Lacépède,neither Professor Dumeril nor Professor de Quatrefages, would haveaccepted the existence of such a monster sight unseen—specifically,unseen by their own scientific eyes.Striking an average of observations taken at different times—rejectingthose timid estimates that gave the object a length of 200 feet, andignoring those exaggerated views that saw it as a mile wide and threelong—you could still assert that this phenomenal creature greatlyexceeded the dimensions of anything then known to ichthyologists, ifit existed at all.Now then, it did exist, this was an undeniable fact; and since thehuman mind dotes on objects of wonder, you can understand theworldwide excitement caused by this unearthly apparition. As forrelegating it to the realm of fiction, that charge had to be dropped.In essence, on July 20, 1866, the steamer Governor Higginson, from theCalcutta & Burnach Steam Navigation Co., encountered this moving massfive miles off the eastern shores of Australia.Captain Baker at first thought he was in the presence of an unknownreef; he was even about to fix its exact position when two waterspoutsshot out of this inexplicable object and sprang hissing into the airsome 150 feet. So, unless this reef was subject to the intermittenteruptions of a geyser, the Governor Higginson had fair and honestdealings with some aquatic mammal, until then unknown, that couldspurt from its blowholes waterspouts mixed with air and steam.Similar events were likewise observed in Pacific seas, on July 23 ofthe same year, by the Christopher Columbus from the West India &Pacific Steam Navigation Co. Consequently, this extraordinary cetaceancould transfer itself from one locality to another with startlingswiftness, since within an interval of just three days, the GovernorHigginson and the Christopher Columbus had observed it at twopositions on the charts separated by a distance of more than 700nautical leagues.Fifteen days later and 2,000 leagues farther, the Helvetia from theCompagnie Nationale and the Shannon from the Royal Mail line, runningon opposite tacks in that part of the Atlantic lying between theUnited States and Europe, respectively signaled each other that themonster had been sighted in latitude 42 degrees 15’ north andlongitude 60 degrees 35’ west of the meridian of Greenwich. From theirsimultaneous observations, they were able to estimate the mammal’sminimum length at more than 350 English feet;* this was because boththe Shannon and the Helvetia were of smaller dimensions, although eachmeasured 100 meters stem to stern. Now then, the biggest whales, thoserorqual whales that frequent the waterways of the Aleutian Islands,have never exceeded a length of 56 meters—if they reach even that.*Author’s Note: About 106 meters. An English foot is only 30.4centimeters.One after another, reports arrived that would profoundly affect publicopinion: new observations taken by the transatlantic liner Pereire,the Inman line’s Etna running afoul of the monster, an official reportdrawn up by officers on the French frigate Normandy, dead-earnestreckonings obtained by the general staff of Commodore Fitz-Jamesaboard the Lord Clyde. In lighthearted countries, people joked aboutthis phenomenon, but such serious, practical countries as England,America, and Germany were deeply concerned.In every big city the monster was the latest rage; they sang about itin the coffee houses, they ridiculed it in the newspapers, theydramatized it in the theaters. The tabloids found it a fineopportunity for hatching all sorts of hoaxes. In those newspapersshort of copy, you saw the reappearance of every gigantic imaginarycreature, from “Moby Dick,” that dreadful white whale from the HighArctic regions, to the stupendous kraken whose tentacles could entwinea 500-ton craft and drag it into the ocean depths. They even reprintedreports from ancient times: the views of Aristotle and Pliny acceptingthe existence of such monsters, then the Norwegian stories of BishopPontoppidan, the narratives of Paul Egede, and finally the reports ofCaptain Harrington—whose good faith is above suspicion—in which heclaims he saw, while aboard the Castilian in 1857, one of thoseenormous serpents that, until then, had frequented only the seas ofFrance’s old extremist newspaper, The Constitutionalist.An interminable debate then broke out between believers and skepticsin the scholarly societies and scientific journals. The “monsterquestion” inflamed all minds. During this memorable campaign,journalists making a profession of science battled with those making aprofession of wit, spilling waves of ink and some of them even two orthree drops of blood, since they went from sea serpents to the mostoffensive personal remarks.For six months the war seesawed. With inexhaustible zest, the popularpress took potshots at feature articles from the Geographic Instituteof Brazil, the Royal Academy of Science in Berlin, the BritishAssociation, the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., atdiscussions in The Indian Archipelago, in Cosmos published by FatherMoigno, in Petermann’s Mittheilungen,* and at scientific chronicles inthe great French and foreign newspapers. When the monster’s detractorscited a saying by the botanist Linnaeus that “nature doesn’t makeleaps,” witty writers in the popular periodicals parodied it,maintaining in essence that “nature doesn’t make lunatics,” andordering their contemporaries never to give the lie to nature bybelieving in krakens, sea serpents, “Moby Dicks,” and other all-outefforts from drunken seamen. Finally, in a much-feared satiricaljournal, an article by its most popular columnist finished off themonster for good, spurning it in the style of Hippolytus repulsing theamorous advances of his stepmother Phaedra, and giving the creatureits quietus amid a universal burst of laughter. Wit had defeatedscience.*German: “Bulletin.” Ed.During the first months of the year 1867, the question seemed to beburied, and it didn’t seem due for resurrection, when new facts werebrought to the public’s attention. But now it was no longer an issueof a scientific problem to be solved, but a quite real and seriousdanger to be avoided. The question took an entirely new turn. Themonster again became an islet, rock, or reef, but a runaway reef,unfixed and elusive.On March 5, 1867, the Moravian from the Montreal Ocean Co., lyingduring the night in latitude 27 degrees 30’ and longitude 72 degrees15’, ran its starboard quarter afoul of a rock marked on no charts ofthese waterways. Under the combined efforts of wind and 400-horsepowersteam, it was traveling at a speed of thirteen knots. Without the highquality of its hull, the Moravian would surely have split open fromthis collision and gone down together with those 237 passengers it wasbringing back from Canada.This accident happened around five o’clock in the morning, just as daywas beginning to break. The officers on watch rushed to the craft’sstern. They examined the ocean with the most scrupulous care. They sawnothing except a strong eddy breaking three cable lengths out, as ifthose sheets of water had been violently churned. The site’s exactbearings were taken, and the Moravian continued on course apparentlyundamaged. Had it run afoul of an underwater rock or the wreckage ofsome enormous derelict ship? They were unable to say. But when theyexamined its undersides in the service yard, they discovered that partof its keel had been smashed.This occurrence, extremely serious in itself, might perhaps have beenforgotten like so many others, if three weeks later it hadn’t beenreenacted under identical conditions. Only, thanks to the nationalityof the ship victimized by this new ramming, and thanks to thereputation of the company to which this ship belonged, the eventcaused an immense uproar.No one is unaware of the name of that famous English shipowner,Cunard. In 1840 this shrewd industrialist founded a postal servicebetween Liverpool and Halifax, featuring three wooden ships with400-horsepower paddle wheels and a burden of 1,162 metric tons. Eightyears later, the company’s assets were increased by four650-horsepower ships at 1,820 metric tons, and in two more years, bytwo other vessels of still greater power and tonnage. In 1853 theCunard Co., whose mail-carrying charter had just been renewed,successively added to its assets the Arabia, the Persia, the China,the Scotia, the Java, and the Russia, all ships of top speed and,after the Great Eastern, the biggest ever to plow the seas. So in 1867this company owned twelve ships, eight with paddle wheels and fourwith propellers.If I give these highly condensed details, it is so everyone can fullyunderstand the importance of this maritime transportation company,known the world over for its shrewd management. No transoceanicnavigational undertaking has been conducted with more ability, nobusiness dealings have been crowned with greater success. Intwenty-six years Cunard ships have made 2,000 Atlantic crossingswithout so much as a voyage canceled, a delay recorded, a man, acraft, or even a letter lost. Accordingly, despite strong competitionfrom France, passengers still choose the Cunard line in preference toall others, as can be seen in a recent survey of officialdocuments. Given this, no one will be astonished at the uproarprovoked by this accident involving one of its finest steamers.On April 13, 1867, with a smooth sea and a moderate breeze, the Scotialay in longitude 15 degrees 12’ and latitude 45 degrees 37’. It wastraveling at a speed of 13.43 knots under the thrust of its1,000-horsepower engines. Its paddle wheels were churning the sea withperfect steadiness. It was then drawing 6.7 meters of water anddisplacing 6,624 cubic meters.At 4:17 in the afternoon, during a high tea for passengers gathered inthe main lounge, a collision occurred, scarcely noticeable on thewhole, affecting the Scotia’s hull in that quarter a little astern ofits port paddle wheel.The Scotia hadn’t run afoul of something, it had been fouled, and by acutting or perforating instrument rather than a blunt one. Thisencounter seemed so minor that nobody on board would have beendisturbed by it, had it not been for the shouts of crewmen in thehold, who climbed on deck yelling:“We’re sinking! We’re sinking!”At first the passengers were quite frightened, but Captain Andersonhastened to reassure them. In fact, there could be no immediatedanger. Divided into seven compartments by watertight bulkheads, theScotia could brave any leak with impunity.Captain Anderson immediately made his way into the hold. He discoveredthat the fifth compartment had been invaded by the sea, and the speedof this invasion proved that the leak was considerable. Fortunatelythis compartment didn’t contain the boilers, because their furnaceswould have been abruptly extinguished.Captain Anderson called an immediate halt, and one of his sailorsdived down to assess the damage. Within moments they had located ahole two meters in width on the steamer’s underside. Such a leak couldnot be patched, and with its paddle wheels half swamped, the Scotiahad no choice but to continue its voyage. By then it lay 300 milesfrom Cape Clear, and after three days of delay that filled Liverpoolwith acute anxiety, it entered the company docks.The engineers then proceeded to inspect the Scotia, which had been putin dry dock. They couldn’t believe their eyes. Two and a half metersbelow its waterline, there gaped a symmetrical gash in the shape of anisosceles triangle. This breach in the sheet iron was so perfectlyformed, no punch could have done a cleaner job of it. Consequently, itmust have been produced by a perforating tool of uncommontoughness—plus, after being launched with prodigious power and thenpiercing four centimeters of sheet iron, this tool had needed towithdraw itself by a backward motion truly inexplicable.This was the last straw, and it resulted in arousing public passionsall over again. Indeed, from this moment on, any maritime casualtywithout an established cause was charged to the monster’saccount. This outrageous animal had to shoulder responsibility for allderelict vessels, whose numbers are unfortunately considerable, sinceout of those 3,000 ships whose losses are recorded annually at themarine insurance bureau, the figure for steam or sailing shipssupposedly lost with all hands, in the absence of any news, amounts toat least 200!Now then, justly or unjustly, it was the “monster” who stood accusedof their disappearance; and since, thanks to it, travel between thevarious continents had become more and more dangerous, the publicspoke up and demanded straight out that, at all cost, the seas bepurged of this fearsome cetacean.CHAPTER 2The Pros and ConsDURING THE PERIOD in which these developments were occurring, I hadreturned from a scientific undertaking organized to explore theNebraska badlands in the United States. In my capacity as AssistantProfessor at the Paris Museum of Natural History, I had been attachedto this expedition by the French government. After spending six monthsin Nebraska, I arrived in New York laden with valuable collectionsnear the end of March. My departure for France was set for earlyMay. In the meantime, then, I was busy classifying my mineralogical,botanical, and zoological treasures when that incident took place withthe Scotia.I was perfectly abreast of this question, which was the big news ofthe day, and how could I not have been? I had read and reread everyAmerican and European newspaper without being any farther along. Thismystery puzzled me. Finding it impossible to form any views, I driftedfrom one extreme to the other. Something was out there, that much wascertain, and any doubting Thomas was invited to place his finger onthe Scotia’s wound.When I arrived in New York, the question was at the boiling point. Thehypothesis of a drifting islet or an elusive reef, put forward bypeople not quite in their right minds, was completely eliminated. Andindeed, unless this reef had an engine in its belly, how could it moveabout with such prodigious speed?Also discredited was the idea of a floating hull or some otherenormous wreckage, and again because of this speed of movement.So only two possible solutions to the question were left, creating twovery distinct groups of supporters: on one side, those favoring amonster of colossal strength; on the other, those favoring an“underwater boat” of tremendous motor power.Now then, although the latter hypothesis was completely admissible, itcouldn’t stand up to inquiries conducted in both the New World and theOld. That a private individual had such a mechanism at his disposalwas less than probable. Where and when had he built it, and how couldhe have built it in secret?Only some government could own such an engine of destruction, and inthese disaster-filled times, when men tax their ingenuity to buildincreasingly powerful aggressive weapons, it was possible that,unknown to the rest of the world, some nation could have been testingsuch a fearsome machine. The Chassepot rifle led to the torpedo, andthe torpedo has led to this underwater battering ram, which in turnwill lead to the world putting its foot down. At least I hope it will.But this hypothesis of a war machine collapsed in the face of formaldenials from the various governments. Since the public interest was atstake and transoceanic travel was suffering, the sincerity of thesegovernments could not be doubted. Besides, how could the assembly ofthis underwater boat have escaped public notice? Keeping a secretunder such circumstances would be difficult enough for an individual,and certainly impossible for a nation whose every move is underconstant surveillance by rival powers.So, after inquiries conducted in England, France, Russia, Prussia,Spain, Italy, America, and even Turkey, the hypothesis of anunderwater Monitor was ultimately rejected.And so the monster surfaced again, despite the endless witticismsheaped on it by the popular press, and the human imagination soon gotcaught up in the most ridiculous ichthyological fantasies.After I arrived in New York, several people did me the honor ofconsulting me on the phenomenon in question. In France I had publisheda two-volume work, in quarto, entitled The Mysteries of the GreatOcean Depths. Well received in scholarly circles, this book hadestablished me as a specialist in this pretty obscure field of naturalhistory. My views were in demand. As long as I could deny the realityof the business, I confined myself to a flat “no comment.” But soon,pinned to the wall, I had to explain myself straight out. And in thisvein, “the honorable Pierre Aronnax, Professor at the Paris Museum,”was summoned by The New York Herald to formulate his views no matterwhat.I complied. Since I could no longer hold my tongue, I let it wag. Idiscussed the question in its every aspect, both political andscientific, and this is an excerpt from the well-padded article Ipublished in the issue of April 30.“Therefore,” I wrote, “after examining these different hypotheses oneby one, we are forced, every other supposition having been refuted, toaccept the existence of an extremely powerful marine animal.“The deepest parts of the ocean are totally unknown to us. Nosoundings have been able to reach them. What goes on in those distantdepths? What creatures inhabit, or could inhabit, those regions twelveor fifteen miles beneath the surface of the water? What is theconstitution of these animals? It’s almost beyond conjecture.“However, the solution to this problem submitted to me can take theform of a choice between two alternatives.“Either we know every variety of creature populating our planet, or wedo not.“If we do not know every one of them, if nature still keepsichthyological secrets from us, nothing is more admissible than toaccept the existence of fish or cetaceans of new species or even newgenera, animals with a basically ‘cast-iron’ constitution that inhabitstrata beyond the reach of our soundings, and which some developmentor other, an urge or a whim if you prefer, can bring to the upperlevel of the ocean for long intervals.“If, on the other hand, we do know every living species, we must lookfor the animal in question among those marine creatures alreadycataloged, and in this event I would be inclined to accept theexistence of a giant narwhale.“The common narwhale, or sea unicorn, often reaches a length of sixtyfeet. Increase its dimensions fivefold or even tenfold, then give thiscetacean a strength in proportion to its size while enlarging itsoffensive weapons, and you have the animal we’re looking for. It wouldhave the proportions determined by the officers of the Shannon, theinstrument needed to perforate the Scotia, and the power to pierce asteamer’s hull.“In essence, the narwhale is armed with a sort of ivory sword, orlance, as certain naturalists have expressed it. It’s a king-sizedtooth as hard as steel. Some of these teeth have been found buried inthe bodies of baleen whales, which the narwhale attacks withinvariable success. Others have been wrenched, not without difficulty,from the undersides of vessels that narwhales have pierced cleanthrough, as a gimlet pierces a wine barrel. The museum at the Facultyof Medicine in Paris owns one of these tusks with a length of 2.25meters and a width at its base of forty-eight centimeters!“All right then! Imagine this weapon to be ten times stronger and theanimal ten times more powerful, launch it at a speed of twenty milesper hour, multiply its mass times its velocity, and you get just thecollision we need to cause the specified catastrophe.“So, until information becomes more abundant, I plump for a seaunicorn of colossal dimensions, no longer armed with a mere lance butwith an actual spur, like ironclad frigates or those warships called‘rams,’ whose mass and motor power it would possess simultaneously.“This inexplicable phenomenon is thus explained away—unless it’ssomething else entirely, which, despite everything that has beensighted, studied, explored and experienced, is still possible!”These last words were cowardly of me; but as far as I could, I wantedto protect my professorial dignity and not lay myself open to laughterfrom the Americans, who when they do laugh, laugh raucously. I hadleft myself a loophole. Yet deep down, I had accepted the existence of“the monster.”My article was hotly debated, causing a fine old uproar. It rallied anumber of supporters. Moreover, the solution it proposed allowed forfree play of the imagination. The human mind enjoys impressive visionsof unearthly creatures. Now then, the sea is precisely their bestmedium, the only setting suitable for the breeding and growing of suchgiants—next to which such land animals as elephants or rhinocerosesare mere dwarves. The liquid masses support the largest known speciesof mammals and perhaps conceal mollusks of incomparable size orcrustaceans too frightful to contemplate, such as 100-meter lobstersor crabs weighing 200 metric tons! Why not? Formerly, in prehistoricdays, land animals (quadrupeds, apes, reptiles, birds) were built on agigantic scale. Our Creator cast them using a colossal mold that timehas gradually made smaller. With its untold depths, couldn’t the seakeep alive such huge specimens of life from another age, this sea thatnever changes while the land masses undergo almost continuousalteration? Couldn’t the heart of the ocean hide the last-remainingvarieties of these titanic species, for whom years are centuries andcenturies millennia?But I mustn’t let these fantasies run away with me! Enough of thesefairy tales that time has changed for me into harsh realities. Irepeat: opinion had crystallized as to the nature of this phenomenon,and the public accepted without argument the existence of a prodigiouscreature that had nothing in common with the fabled sea serpent.Yet if some saw it purely as a scientific problem to be solved, morepractical people, especially in America and England, were determinedto purge the ocean of this daunting monster, to insure the safety oftransoceanic travel. The industrial and commercial newspapers dealtwith the question chiefly from this viewpoint. The Shipping &Mercantile Gazette, the Lloyd’s List, France’s Packetboat and Maritime& Colonial Review, all the rags devoted to insurance companies—whothreatened to raise their premium rates—were unanimous on this point.Public opinion being pronounced, the States of the Union were thefirst in the field. In New York preparations were under way for anexpedition designed to chase this narwhale. A high-speed frigate, theAbraham Lincoln, was fitted out for putting to sea as soon aspossible. The naval arsenals were unlocked for Commander Farragut, whopressed energetically forward with the arming of his frigate.But, as it always happens, just when a decision had been made to chasethe monster, the monster put in no further appearances. For two monthsnobody heard a word about it. Not a single ship encounteredit. Apparently the unicorn had gotten wise to these plots being wovenaround it. People were constantly babbling about the creature, evenvia the Atlantic Cable! Accordingly, the wags claimed that thisslippery rascal had waylaid some passing telegram and was making themost of it.So the frigate was equipped for a far-off voyage and armed withfearsome fishing gear, but nobody knew where to steer it. Andimpatience grew until, on June 2, word came that the Tampico, asteamer on the San Francisco line sailing from California to Shanghai,had sighted the animal again, three weeks before in the northerly seasof the Pacific.This news caused intense excitement. Not even a 24-hour breather wasgranted to Commander Farragut. His provisions were loaded onboard. His coal bunkers were overflowing. Not a crewman was missingfrom his post. To cast off, he needed only to fire and stoke hisfurnaces! Half a day’s delay would have been unforgivable! ButCommander Farragut wanted nothing more than to go forth.I received a letter three hours before the Abraham Lincoln left itsBrooklyn pier;* the letter read as follows:*Author’s Note: A pier is a type of wharf expressly set aside for anindividual vessel.Pierre AronnaxProfessor at the Paris MuseumFifth Avenue HotelNew YorkSir:If you would like to join the expedition on the Abraham Lincoln, thegovernment of the Union will be pleased to regard you as France’srepresentative in this undertaking. Commander Farragut has a cabin atyour disposal.Very cordially yours,J. B. HOBSON,Secretary of the Navy.CHAPTER 3As Master WishesTHREE SECONDS before the arrival of J. B. Hobson’s letter, I no moredreamed of chasing the unicorn than of trying for the NorthwestPassage. Three seconds after reading this letter from the honorableSecretary of the Navy, I understood at last that my true vocation, mysole purpose in life, was to hunt down this disturbing monster and ridthe world of it.Even so, I had just returned from an arduous journey, exhausted andbadly needing a rest. I wanted nothing more than to see my countryagain, my friends, my modest quarters by the Botanical Gardens, mydearly beloved collections! But now nothing could hold me back. Iforgot everything else, and without another thought of exhaustion,friends, or collections, I accepted the American government’s offer.“Besides,” I mused, “all roads lead home to Europe, and our unicornmay be gracious enough to take me toward the coast of France! Thatfine animal may even let itself be captured in European seas—as apersonal favor to me—and I’ll bring back to the Museum of NaturalHistory at least half a meter of its ivory lance!”But in the meantime I would have to look for this narwhale in thenorthern Pacific Ocean; which meant returning to France by way of theAntipodes.“Conseil!” I called in an impatient voice.Conseil was my manservant. A devoted lad who went with me on all myjourneys; a gallant Flemish boy whom I genuinely liked and whoreturned the compliment; a born stoic, punctilious on principle,habitually hardworking, rarely startled by life’s surprises, veryskillful with his hands, efficient in his every duty, and despite hishaving a name that means “counsel,” never giving advice—not even theunsolicited kind!From rubbing shoulders with scientists in our little universe by theBotanical Gardens, the boy had come to know a thing or two. In ConseilI had a seasoned specialist in biological classification, anenthusiast who could run with acrobatic agility up and down the wholeladder of branches, groups, classes, subclasses, orders, families,genera, subgenera, species, and varieties. But there his science cameto a halt. Classifying was everything to him, so he knew nothingelse. Well versed in the theory of classification, he was poorlyversed in its practical application, and I doubt that he could tell asperm whale from a baleen whale! And yet, what a fine, gallant lad!For the past ten years, Conseil had gone with me wherever sciencebeckoned. Not once did he comment on the length or the hardships of ajourney. Never did he object to buckling up his suitcase for anycountry whatever, China or the Congo, no matter how far off it was. Hewent here, there, and everywhere in perfect contentment. Moreover, heenjoyed excellent health that defied all ailments, owned solidmuscles, but hadn’t a nerve in him, not a sign of nerves—the mentaltype, I mean.The lad was thirty years old, and his age to that of his employer wasas fifteen is to twenty. Please forgive me for this underhanded way ofadmitting I had turned forty.But Conseil had one flaw. He was a fanatic on formality, and he onlyaddressed me in the third person—to the point where it got tiresome.“Conseil!” I repeated, while feverishly beginning my preparations fordeparture.To be sure, I had confidence in this devoted lad. Ordinarily, I neverasked whether or not it suited him to go with me on my journeys; butthis time an expedition was at issue that could drag on indefinitely,a hazardous undertaking whose purpose was to hunt an animal that couldsink a frigate as easily as a walnut shell! There was good reason tostop and think, even for the world’s most emotionless man. What wouldConseil say?“Conseil!” I called a third time.Conseil appeared.“Did master summon me?” he said, entering.“Yes, my boy. Get my things ready, get yours ready. We’re departing intwo hours.”“As master wishes,” Conseil replied serenely.“We haven’t a moment to lose. Pack as much into my trunk as you can,my traveling kit, my suits, shirts, and socks, don’t bother counting,just squeeze it all in—and hurry!”“What about master’s collections?” Conseil ventured to observe.“We’ll deal with them later.”“What! The archaeotherium, hyracotherium, oreodonts, cheiropotamus,and master’s other fossil skeletons?”“The hotel will keep them for us.”“What about master’s live babirusa?”“They’ll feed it during our absence. Anyhow, we’ll leave instructionsto ship the whole menagerie to France.”“Then we aren’t returning to Paris?” Conseil asked.“Yes, we are . . . certainly . . . ,” I replied evasively, “but afterwe make a detour.”“Whatever detour master wishes.”“Oh, it’s nothing really! A route slightly less direct, that’sall. We’re leaving on the Abraham Lincoln.”“As master thinks best,” Conseil replied placidly.“You see, my friend, it’s an issue of the monster, the notoriousnarwhale. We’re going to rid the seas of it! The author of atwo-volume work, in quarto, on The Mysteries of the Great Ocean Depthshas no excuse for not setting sail with Commander Farragut. It’s aglorious mission but also a dangerous one! We don’t know where it willtake us! These beasts can be quite unpredictable! But we’re going justthe same! We have a commander who’s game for anything!”“What master does, I’ll do,” Conseil replied.“But think it over, because I don’t want to hide anything fromyou. This is one of those voyages from which people don’t always comeback!”“As master wishes.”A quarter of an hour later, our trunks were ready. Conseil did them ina flash, and I was sure the lad hadn’t missed a thing, because heclassified shirts and suits as expertly as birds and mammals.The hotel elevator dropped us off in the main vestibule on themezzanine. I went down a short stair leading to the ground floor. Isettled my bill at that huge counter that was always under siege by aconsiderable crowd. I left instructions for shipping my containers ofstuffed animals and dried plants to Paris, France. I opened a line ofcredit sufficient to cover the babirusa and, Conseil at my heels, Ijumped into a carriage.For a fare of twenty francs, the vehicle went down Broadway to UnionSquare, took Fourth Ave. to its junction with Bowery St., turned intoKatrin St. and halted at Pier 34. There the Katrin ferry transferredmen, horses, and carriage to Brooklyn, that great New York annexlocated on the left bank of the East River, and in a few minutes wearrived at the wharf next to which the Abraham Lincoln was vomitingtorrents of black smoke from its two funnels.Our baggage was immediately carried to the deck of the frigate. Irushed aboard. I asked for Commander Farragut. One of the sailors ledme to the afterdeck, where I stood in the presence of a smart-lookingofficer who extended his hand to me.“Professor Pierre Aronnax?” he said to me.“The same,” I replied. “Commander Farragut?”“In person. Welcome aboard, professor. Your cabin is waiting for you.”I bowed, and letting the commander attend to getting under way, I wastaken to the cabin that had been set aside for me.The Abraham Lincoln had been perfectly chosen and fitted out for itsnew assignment. It was a high-speed frigate furnished withsuperheating equipment that allowed the tension of its steam to buildto seven atmospheres. Under this pressure the Abraham Lincoln reachedan average speed of 18.3 miles per hour, a considerable speed butstill not enough to cope with our gigantic cetacean.The frigate’s interior accommodations complemented its nauticalvirtues. I was well satisfied with my cabin, which was located in thestern and opened into the officers’ mess.“We’ll be quite comfortable here,” I told Conseil.“With all due respect to master,” Conseil replied, “as comfortable asa hermit crab inside the shell of a whelk.”I left Conseil to the proper stowing of our luggage and climbed ondeck to watch the preparations for getting under way.Just then Commander Farragut was giving orders to cast off the lastmoorings holding the Abraham Lincoln to its Brooklyn pier. And so ifI’d been delayed by a quarter of an hour or even less, the frigatewould have gone without me, and I would have missed out on thisunearthly, extraordinary, and inconceivable expedition, whose truestory might well meet with some skepticism.But Commander Farragut didn’t want to waste a single day, or even asingle hour, in making for those seas where the animal had just beensighted. He summoned his engineer.“Are we up to pressure?” he asked the man.“Aye, sir,” the engineer replied.“Go ahead, then!” Commander Farragut called.At this order, which was relayed to the engine by means of acompressed-air device, the mechanics activated the start-upwheel. Steam rushed whistling into the gaping valves. Long horizontalpistons groaned and pushed the tie rods of the drive shaft. The bladesof the propeller churned the waves with increasing speed, and theAbraham Lincoln moved out majestically amid a spectator-laden escortof some 100 ferries and tenders.**Author’s Note: Tenders are small steamboats that assist the bigliners.The wharves of Brooklyn, and every part of New York bordering the EastRiver, were crowded with curiosity seekers. Departing from 500,000throats, three cheers burst forth in succession. Thousands ofhandkerchiefs were waving above these tightly packed masses, hailingthe AbrahamLincoln until it reached the waters of the Hudson River, at the tip ofthe long peninsula that forms New York City.The frigate then went along the New Jersey coast—the wonderful rightbank of this river, all loaded down with country homes—and passed bythe forts to salutes from their biggest cannons. The Abraham Lincolnreplied by three times lowering and hoisting the American flag, whosethirty-nine stars gleamed from the gaff of the mizzen sail; then,changing speed to take the buoy-marked channel that curved into theinner bay formed by the spit of Sandy Hook, it hugged thissand-covered strip of land where thousands of spectators acclaimed usone more time.The escort of boats and tenders still followed the frigate and onlyleft us when we came abreast of the lightship, whose two signal lightsmark the entrance of the narrows to Upper New York Bay.Three o’clock then sounded. The harbor pilot went down into his dinghyand rejoined a little schooner waiting for him to leeward. Thefurnaces were stoked; the propeller churned the waves more swiftly;the frigate skirted the flat, yellow coast of Long Island; and ateight o’clock in the evening, after the lights of Fire Island hadvanished into the northwest, we ran at full steam onto the dark watersof the Atlantic.CHAPTER 4Ned LandCOMMANDER FARRAGUT was a good seaman, worthy of the frigate hecommanded. His ship and he were one. He was its very soul. On thecetacean question no doubts arose in his mind, and he didn’t allow theanimal’s existence to be disputed aboard his vessel. He believed in itas certain pious women believe in the leviathan from the Book ofJob—out of faith, not reason. The monster existed, and he had vowed torid the seas of it. The man was a sort of Knight of Rhodes, alatter-day Sir Dieudonné of Gozo, on his way to fight an encounterwith the dragon devastating the island. Either Commander Farragutwould slay the narwhale, or the narwhale would slay CommanderFarragut. No middle of the road for these two.The ship’s officers shared the views of their leader. They could beheard chatting, discussing, arguing, calculating the different chancesof an encounter, and observing the vast expanse of theocean. Voluntary watches from the crosstrees of the topgallant sailwere self-imposed by more than one who would have cursed such toilunder any other circumstances. As often as the sun swept over itsdaily arc, the masts were populated with sailors whose feet itched andcouldn’t hold still on the planking of the deck below! And the AbrahamLincoln’s stempost hadn’t even cut the suspected waters of thePacific.As for the crew, they only wanted to encounter the unicorn, harpoonit, haul it on board, and carve it up. They surveyed the sea withscrupulous care. Besides, Commander Farragut had mentioned that acertain sum of $2,000.00 was waiting for the man who first sighted theanimal, be he cabin boy or sailor, mate or officer. I’ll let thereader decide whether eyes got proper exercise aboard the AbrahamLincoln.As for me, I didn’t lag behind the others and I yielded to no one myshare in these daily observations. Our frigate would have hadfivescore good reasons for renaming itself the Argus, after thatmythological beast with 100 eyes! The lone rebel among us was Conseil,who seemed utterly uninterested in the question exciting us and wasout of step with the general enthusiasm on board.As I said, Commander Farragut had carefully equipped his ship with allthe gear needed to fish for a gigantic cetacean. No whaling vesselcould have been better armed. We had every known mechanism, from thehand-hurled harpoon, to the blunderbuss firing barbed arrows, to theduck gun with exploding bullets. On the forecastle was mounted thelatest model breech-loading cannon, very heavy of barrel and narrow ofbore, a weapon that would figure in the Universal Exhibition of1867. Made in America, this valuable instrument could fire afour-kilogram conical projectile an average distance of sixteenkilometers without the least bother.So the Abraham Lincoln wasn’t lacking in means of destruction. But ithad better still. It had Ned Land, the King of Harpooners.Gifted with uncommon manual ability, Ned Land was a Canadian who hadno equal in his dangerous trade. Dexterity, coolness, bravery, andcunning were virtues he possessed to a high degree, and it took atruly crafty baleen whale or an exceptionally astute sperm whale toelude the thrusts of his harpoon.Ned Land was about forty years old. A man of great height—over sixEnglish feet—he was powerfully built, serious in manner, not verysociable, sometimes headstrong, and quite ill-tempered whencrossed. His looks caught the attention, and above all the strength ofhis gaze, which gave a unique emphasis to his facial appearance.Commander Farragut, to my thinking, had made a wise move in hiring onthis man. With his eye and his throwing arm, he was worth the wholecrew all by himself. I can do no better than to compare him with apowerful telescope that could double as a cannon always ready to fire.To say Canadian is to say French, and as unsociable as Ned Land was, Imust admit he took a definite liking to me. No doubt it was mynationality that attracted him. It was an opportunity for him tospeak, and for me to hear, that old Rabelaisian dialect still used insome Canadian provinces. The harpooner’s family originated in Quebec,and they were already a line of bold fishermen back in the days whenthis town still belonged to France.Little by little Ned developed a taste for chatting, and I lovedhearing the tales of his adventures in the polar seas. He describedhis fishing trips and his battles with great natural lyricism. Histales took on the form of an epic poem, and I felt I was hearing someCanadian Homer reciting his Iliad of the High Arctic regions.I’m writing of this bold companion as I currently know him. Becausewe’ve become old friends, united in that permanent comradeship bornand cemented during only the most frightful crises! Ah, my gallantNed! I ask only to live 100 years more, the longer to remember you!And now, what were Ned Land’s views on this question of a marinemonster? I must admit that he flatly didn’t believe in the unicorn,and alone on board, he didn’t share the general conviction. He avoidedeven dealing with the subject, for which one day I felt compelled totake him to task.During the magnificent evening of June 25—in other words, three weeksafter our departure—the frigate lay abreast of Cabo Blanco, thirtymiles to leeward of the coast of Patagonia. We had crossed the Tropicof Capricorn, and the Strait of Magellan opened less than 700 miles tothe south. Before eight days were out, the Abraham Lincoln would plowthe waves of the Pacific.Seated on the afterdeck, Ned Land and I chatted about one thing andanother, staring at that mysterious sea whose depths to this day arebeyond the reach of human eyes. Quite naturally, I led ourconversation around to the giant unicorn, and I weighed ourexpedition’s various chances for success or failure. Then, seeing thatNed just let me talk without saying much himself, I pressed him moreclosely.“Ned,” I asked him, “how can you still doubt the reality of thiscetacean we’re after? Do you have any particular reasons for being soskeptical?”The harpooner stared at me awhile before replying, slapped his broadforehead in one of his standard gestures, closed his eyes as if tocollect himself, and finally said:“Just maybe, Professor Aronnax.”“But Ned, you’re a professional whaler, a man familiar with all thegreat marine mammals—your mind should easily accept this hypothesis ofan enormous cetacean, and you ought to be the last one to doubt itunder these circumstances!”“That’s just where you’re mistaken, professor,” Ned replied. “Thecommon man may still believe in fabulous comets crossing outer space,or in prehistoric monsters living at the earth’s core, but astronomersand geologists don’t swallow such fairy tales. It’s the same withwhalers. I’ve chased plenty of cetaceans, I’ve harpooned a goodnumber, I’ve killed several. But no matter how powerful and well armedthey were, neither their tails or their tusks could puncture thesheet-iron plates of a steamer.”“Even so, Ned, people mention vessels that narwhale tusks have runclean through.”“Wooden ships maybe,” the Canadian replied. “But I’ve never seen thelike. So till I have proof to the contrary, I’ll deny that baleenwhales, sperm whales, or unicorns can do any such thing.”“Listen to me, Ned—”“No, no, professor. I’ll go along with anything you want exceptthat. Some gigantic devilfish maybe . . . ?”“Even less likely, Ned. The devilfish is merely a mollusk, and eventhis name hints at its semiliquid flesh, because it’s Latin meaningsoft one. The devilfish doesn’t belong to the vertebrate branch, andeven if it were 500 feet long, it would still be utterly harmless toships like the Scotia or the Abraham Lincoln. Consequently, the featsof krakens or other monsters of that ilk must be relegated to therealm of fiction.”“So, Mr. Naturalist,” Ned Land continued in a bantering tone, “you’lljust keep on believing in the existence of some enormous cetacean. . . ?”“Yes, Ned, I repeat it with a conviction backed by factual logic. Ibelieve in the existence of a mammal with a powerful constitution,belonging to the vertebrate branch like baleen whales, sperm whales,or dolphins, and armed with a tusk made of horn that has tremendouspenetrating power.”“Humph!” the harpooner put in, shaking his head with the attitude of aman who doesn’t want to be convinced.“Note well, my fine Canadian,” I went on, “if such an animal exists,if it lives deep in the ocean, if it frequents the liquid stratalocated miles beneath the surface of the water, it needs to have aconstitution so solid, it defies all comparison.”“And why this powerful constitution?” Ned asked.“Because it takes incalculable strength just to live in those deepstrata and withstand their pressure.”“Oh really?” Ned said, tipping me a wink.“Oh really, and I can prove it to you with a few simple figures.”“Bosh!” Ned replied. “You can make figures do anything you want!”“In business, Ned, but not in mathematics. Listen to me. Let’s acceptthat the pressure of one atmosphere is represented by the pressure ofa column of water thirty-two feet high. In reality, such a column ofwater wouldn’t be quite so high because here we’re dealing with saltwater, which is denser than fresh water. Well then, when you diveunder the waves, Ned, for every thirty-two feet of water above you,your body is tolerating the pressure of one more atmosphere, in otherwords, one more kilogram per each square centimeter on your body’ssurface. So it follows that at 320 feet down, this pressure is equalto ten atmospheres, to 100 atmospheres at 3,200 feet, and to 1,000atmospheres at 32,000 feet, that is, at about two and a half verticalleagues down. Which is tantamount to saying that if you could reachsuch a depth in the ocean, each square centimeter on your body’ssurface would be experiencing 1,000 kilograms of pressure. Now, mygallant Ned, do you know how many square centimeters you have on yourbodily surface?”“I haven’t the foggiest notion, Professor Aronnax.”“About 17,000.”“As many as that?”“Yes, and since the atmosphere’s pressure actually weighs slightlymore than one kilogram per square centimeter, your 17,000 squarecentimeters are tolerating 17,568 kilograms at this very moment.”“Without my noticing it?”“Without your noticing it. And if you aren’t crushed by so muchpressure, it’s because the air penetrates the interior of your bodywith equal pressure. When the inside and outside pressures are inperfect balance, they neutralize each other and allow you to toleratethem without discomfort. But in the water it’s another story.”“Yes, I see,” Ned replied, growing more interested. “Because the watersurrounds me but doesn’t penetrate me.”“Precisely, Ned. So at thirty-two feet beneath the surface of the sea,you’ll undergo a pressure of 17,568 kilograms; at 320 feet, or tentimes greater pressure, it’s 175,680 kilograms; at 3,200 feet, or 100times greater pressure, it’s 1,756,800 kilograms; finally, at 32,000feet, or 1,000 times greater pressure, it’s 17,568,000 kilograms; inother words, you’d be squashed as flat as if you’d just been yankedfrom between the plates of a hydraulic press!”“Fire and brimstone!” Ned put in.“All right then, my fine harpooner, if vertebrates several hundredmeters long and proportionate in bulk live at such depths, theirsurface areas make up millions of square centimeters, and the pressurethey undergo must be assessed in billions of kilograms. Calculate,then, how much resistance of bone structure and strength ofconstitution they’d need in order to withstand such pressures!”“They’d need to be manufactured,” Ned Land replied, “from sheet-ironplates eight inches thick, like ironclad frigates.”“Right, Ned, and then picture the damage such a mass could inflict ifit were launched with the speed of an express train against a ship’shull.”“Yes . . . indeed . . . maybe,” the Canadian replied, staggered bythese figures but still not willing to give in.“Well, have I convinced you?”“You’ve convinced me of one thing, Mr. Naturalist. That deep in thesea, such animals would need to be just as strong as you say—if theyexist.”“But if they don’t exist, my stubborn harpooner, how do you explainthe accident that happened to the Scotia?”“It’s maybe . . . ,” Ned said, hesitating.“Go on!”“Because . . . it just couldn’t be true!” the Canadian replied,unconsciously echoing a famous catchphrase of the scientist Arago.But this reply proved nothing, other than how bullheaded the harpoonercould be. That day I pressed him no further. The Scotia’s accident wasundeniable. Its hole was real enough that it had to be plugged up, andI don’t think a hole’s existence can be more emphatically proven. Nowthen, this hole didn’t make itself, and since it hadn’t resulted fromunderwater rocks or underwater machines, it must have been caused bythe perforating tool of some animal.Now, for all the reasons put forward to this point, I believed thatthis animal was a member of the branch Vertebrata, class Mammalia,group Pisciforma, and finally, order Cetacea. As for the family inwhich it would be placed (baleen whale, sperm whale, or dolphin), thegenus to which it belonged, and the species in which it would find itsproper home, these questions had to be left for later. To answer themcalled for dissecting this unknown monster; to dissect it called forcatching it; to catch it called for harpooning it—which was Ned Land’sbusiness; to harpoon it called for sighting it—which was the crew’sbusiness; and to sight it called for encountering it—which was achancy business.CHAPTER 5At Random!FOR SOME WHILE the voyage of the Abraham Lincoln was marked by noincident. But one circumstance arose that displayed Ned Land’smarvelous skills and showed just how much confidence we could place inhim.Off the Falkland Islands on June 30, the frigate came in contact witha fleet of American whalers, and we learned that they hadn’t seen thenarwhale. But one of them, the captain of the Monroe, knew that NedLand had shipped aboard the Abraham Lincoln and asked his help inhunting a baleen whale that was in sight. Anxious to see Ned Land atwork, Commander Farragut authorized him to make his way aboard theMonroe. And the Canadian had such good luck that with a right-and-leftshot, he harpooned not one whale but two, striking the first straightto the heart and catching the other after a few minutes’ chase!Assuredly, if the monster ever had to deal with Ned Land’s harpoon, Iwouldn’t bet on the monster.The frigate sailed along the east coast of South America withprodigious speed. By July 3 we were at the entrance to the Strait ofMagellan, abreast of Cabo de las Virgenes. But Commander Farragut wasunwilling to attempt this tortuous passageway and maneuvered insteadto double Cape Horn.The crew sided with him unanimously. Indeed, were we likely toencounter the narwhale in such a cramped strait? Many of our sailorsswore that the monster couldn’t negotiate this passageway simplybecause “he’s too big for it!”Near three o’clock in the afternoon on July 6, fifteen miles south ofshore, the Abraham Lincoln doubled that solitary islet at the tip ofthe South American continent, that stray rock Dutch seamen had namedCape Horn after their hometown of Hoorn. Our course was set for thenorthwest, and the next day our frigate’s propeller finally churnedthe waters of the Pacific.“Open your eyes! Open your eyes!” repeated the sailors of the AbrahamLincoln.And they opened amazingly wide. Eyes and spyglasses (a bit dazzled, itis true, by the vista of $2,000.00) didn’t remain at rest for aninstant. Day and night we observed the surface of the ocean, and thosewith nyctalopic eyes, whose ability to see in the dark increased theirchances by fifty percent, had an excellent shot at winning the prize.As for me, I was hardly drawn by the lure of money and yet was farfrom the least attentive on board. Snatching only a few minutes formeals and a few hours for sleep, come rain or come shine, I no longerleft the ship’s deck. Sometimes bending over the forecastle railings,sometimes leaning against the sternrail, I eagerly scoured thatcotton-colored wake that whitened the ocean as far as the eye couldsee! And how many times I shared the excitement of general staff andcrew when some unpredictable whale lifted its blackish back above thewaves. In an instant the frigate’s deck would become denselypopulated. The cowls over the companionways would vomit a torrent ofsailors and officers. With panting chests and anxious eyes, we eachwould observe the cetacean’s movements. I stared; I stared until Inearly went blind from a worn-out retina, while Conseil, as stoic asever, kept repeating to me in a calm tone:“If master’s eyes would kindly stop bulging, master will see farther!”But what a waste of energy! The Abraham Lincoln would change courseand race after the animal sighted, only to find an ordinary baleenwhale or a common sperm whale that soon disappeared amid a chorus ofcurses!However, the weather held good. Our voyage was proceeding under themost favorable conditions. By then it was the bad season in thesesouthernmost regions, because July in this zone corresponds to ourJanuary in Europe; but the sea remained smooth and easily visible overa vast perimeter.Ned Land still kept up the most tenacious skepticism; beyond hisspells on watch, he pretended that he never even looked at the surfaceof the waves, at least while no whales were in sight. And yet themarvelous power of his vision could have performed yeoman service. Butthis stubborn Canadian spent eight hours out of every twelve readingor sleeping in his cabin. A hundred times I chided him for hisunconcern.“Bah!” he replied. “Nothing’s out there, Professor Aronnax, and ifthere is some animal, what chance would we have of spotting it? Can’tyou see we’re just wandering around at random? People say they’vesighted this slippery beast again in the Pacific high seas—I’m trulywilling to believe it, but two months have already gone by since then,and judging by your narwhale’s personality, it hates growing moldyfrom hanging out too long in the same waterways! It’s blessed with aterrific gift for getting around. Now, professor, you know even betterthan I that nature doesn’t violate good sense, and she wouldn’t givesome naturally slow animal the ability to move swiftly if it hadn’t aneed to use that talent. So if the beast does exist, it’s already longgone!”I had no reply to this. Obviously we were just groping blindly. Buthow else could we go about it? All the same, our chances wereautomatically pretty limited. Yet everyone still felt confident ofsuccess, and not a sailor on board would have bet against the narwhaleappearing, and soon.On July 20 we cut the Tropic of Capricorn at longitude 105 degrees,and by the 27th of the same month, we had cleared the equator on the110th meridian. These bearings determined, the frigate took a moredecisive westward heading and tackled the seas of the centralPacific. Commander Farragut felt, and with good reason, that it wasbest to stay in deep waters and keep his distance from continents orislands, whose neighborhoods the animal always seemed to avoid—“Nodoubt,” our bosun said, “because there isn’t enough water for him!” Sothe frigate kept well out when passing the Tuamotu, Marquesas, andHawaiian Islands, then cut the Tropic of Cancer at longitude 132degrees and headed for the seas of China.We were finally in the area of the monster’s latest antics! And in allhonesty, shipboard conditions became life-threatening. Hearts werepounding hideously, gearing up for futures full of incurableaneurysms. The entire crew suffered from a nervous excitement thatit’s beyond me to describe. Nobody ate, nobody slept. Twenty times aday some error in perception, or the optical illusions of some sailorperched in the crosstrees, would cause intolerable anguish, and thisemotion, repeated twenty times over, kept us in a state ofirritability so intense that a reaction was bound to follow.And this reaction wasn’t long in coming. For three months, duringwhich each day seemed like a century, the Abraham Lincoln plowed allthe northerly seas of the Pacific, racing after whales sighted,abruptly veering off course, swerving sharply from one tack toanother, stopping suddenly, putting on steam and reversing engines inquick succession, at the risk of stripping its gears, and it didn’tleave a single point unexplored from the beaches of Japan to thecoasts of America. And we found nothing! Nothing except an immensenessof deserted waves! Nothing remotely resembling a gigantic narwhale, oran underwater islet, or a derelict shipwreck, or a runaway reef, oranything the least bit unearthly!So the reaction set in. At first, discouragement took hold of people’sminds, opening the door to disbelief. A new feeling appeared on board,made up of three-tenths shame and seven-tenths fury. The crew calledthemselves “out-and-out fools” for being hoodwinked by a fairy tale,then grew steadily more furious! The mountains of arguments amassedover a year collapsed all at once, and each man now wanted only tocatch up on his eating and sleeping, to make up for the time he had sostupidly sacrificed.With typical human fickleness, they jumped from one extreme to theother. Inevitably, the most enthusiastic supporters of the undertakingbecame its most energetic opponents. This reaction mounted upward fromthe bowels of the ship, from the quarters of the bunker hands to themessroom of the general staff; and for certain, if it hadn’t been forCommander Farragut’s characteristic stubbornness, the frigate wouldultimately have put back to that cape in the south.But this futile search couldn’t drag on much longer. The AbrahamLincoln had done everything it could to succeed and had no reason toblame itself. Never had the crew of an American naval craft shown morepatience and zeal; they weren’t responsible for this failure; therewas nothing to do but go home.A request to this effect was presented to the commander. The commanderstood his ground. His sailors couldn’t hide their discontent, andtheir work suffered because of it. I’m unwilling to say that there wasmutiny on board, but after a reasonable period of intransigence,Commander Farragut, like Christopher Columbus before him, asked for agrace period of just three days more. After this three-day delay, ifthe monster hadn’t appeared, our helmsman would give three turns ofthe wheel, and the Abraham Lincoln would chart a course towardEuropean seas.This promise was given on November 2. It had the immediate effect ofreviving the crew’s failing spirits. The ocean was observed withrenewed care. Each man wanted one last look with which to sum up hisexperience. Spyglasses functioned with feverish energy. A supremechallenge had been issued to the giant narwhale, and the latter had noacceptable excuse for ignoring this Summons to Appear!Two days passed. The Abraham Lincoln stayed at half steam. On theoffchance that the animal might be found in these waterways, athousand methods were used to spark its interest or rouse it from itsapathy. Enormous sides of bacon were trailed in our wake, to the greatsatisfaction, I must say, of assorted sharks. While the AbrahamLincoln heaved to, its longboats radiated in every direction around itand didn’t leave a single point of the sea unexplored. But the eveningof November 4 arrived with this underwater mystery still unsolved.At noon the next day, November 5, the agreed-upon delay expired. Aftera position fix, true to his promise, Commander Farragut would have toset his course for the southeast and leave the northerly regions ofthe Pacific decisively behind.By then the frigate lay in latitude 31 degrees 15’ north and longitude136 degrees 42’ east. The shores of Japan were less than 200 miles toour leeward. Night was coming on. Eight o’clock had just struck. Hugeclouds covered the moon’s disk, then in its first quarter. The seaundulated placidly beneath the frigate’s stempost.Just then I was in the bow, leaning over the starboard rail. Conseil,stationed beside me, stared straight ahead. Roosting in the shrouds,the crew examined the horizon, which shrank and darkened little bylittle. Officers were probing the increasing gloom with their nightglasses. Sometimes the murky ocean sparkled beneath moonbeams thatdarted between the fringes of two clouds. Then all traces of lightvanished into the darkness.Observing Conseil, I discovered that, just barely, the gallant lad hadfallen under the general influence. At least so I thought. Perhaps hisnerves were twitching with curiosity for the first time in history.“Come on, Conseil!” I told him. “Here’s your last chance to pocketthat $2,000.00!”“If master will permit my saying so,” Conseil replied, “I neverexpected to win that prize, and the Union government could havepromised $100,000.00 and been none the poorer.”“You’re right, Conseil, it turned out to be a foolish business afterall, and we jumped into it too hastily. What a waste of time, what afutile expense of emotion! Six months ago we could have been back inFrance—”“In master’s little apartment,” Conseil answered. “In master’s museum!And by now I would have classified master’s fossils. And master’sbabirusa would be ensconced in its cage at the zoo in the BotanicalGardens, and it would have attracted every curiosity seeker in town!”“Quite so, Conseil, and what’s more, I imagine that people will soonbe poking fun at us!”“To be sure,” Conseil replied serenely, “I do think they’ll have funat master’s expense. And must it be said . . . ?”“It must be said, Conseil.”“Well then, it will serve master right!”“How true!”“When one has the honor of being an expert as master is, one mustn’tlay himself open to—”Conseil didn’t have time to complete the compliment. In the midst ofthe general silence, a voice became audible. It was Ned Land’s voice,and it shouted:“Ahoy! There’s the thing in question, abreast of us to leeward!”CHAPTER 6At Full SteamAT THIS SHOUT the entire crew rushed toward the harpooner—commander,officers, mates, sailors, cabin boys, down to engineers leaving theirmachinery and stokers neglecting their furnaces. The order was givento stop, and the frigate merely coasted.By then the darkness was profound, and as good as the Canadian’s eyeswere, I still wondered how he could see—and what he had seen. My heartwas pounding fit to burst.But Ned Land was not mistaken, and we all spotted the object his handwas indicating.Two cable lengths off the Abraham Lincoln’s starboard quarter, the seaseemed to be lit up from underneath. This was no mere phosphorescentphenomenon, that much was unmistakable. Submerged some fathoms belowthe surface of the water, the monster gave off that very intense butinexplicable glow that several captains had mentioned in theirreports. This magnificent radiance had to come from some force with agreat illuminating capacity. The edge of its light swept over the seain an immense, highly elongated oval, condensing at the center into ablazing core whose unbearable glow diminished by degrees outward.“It’s only a cluster of phosphorescent particles!” exclaimed one ofthe officers.“No, sir,” I answered with conviction. “Not even angel-wing clams orsalps have ever given off such a powerful light. That glow isbasically electric in nature. Besides . . . look, look! It’s shifting!It’s moving back and forth! It’s darting at us!”A universal shout went up from the frigate.“Quiet!” Commander Farragut said. “Helm hard to leeward! Reverseengines!”Sailors rushed to the helm, engineers to their machinery. Underreverse steam immediately, the Abraham Lincoln beat to port, sweepingin a semicircle.“Right your helm! Engines forward!” Commander Farragut called.These orders were executed, and the frigate swiftly retreated fromthis core of light.My mistake. It wanted to retreat, but the unearthly animal came at uswith a speed double our own.We gasped. More stunned than afraid, we stood mute and motionless. Theanimal caught up with us, played with us. It made a full circle aroundthe frigate—then doing fourteen knots—and wrapped us in sheets ofelectricity that were like luminous dust. Then it retreated two orthree miles, leaving a phosphorescent trail comparable to those swirlsof steam that shoot behind the locomotive of an expresstrain. Suddenly, all the way from the dark horizon where it had goneto gather momentum, the monster abruptly dashed toward the AbrahamLincoln with frightening speed, stopped sharply twenty feet from ourside plates, and died out—not by diving under the water, since itsglow did not recede gradually—but all at once, as if the source ofthis brilliant emanation had suddenly dried up. Then it reappeared onthe other side of the ship, either by circling around us or by glidingunder our hull. At any instant a collision could have occurred thatwould have been fatal to us.Meanwhile I was astonished at the frigate’s maneuvers. It was fleeing,not fighting. Built to pursue, it was being pursued, and I commentedon this to Commander Farragut. His face, ordinarily so emotionless,was stamped with indescribable astonishment.“Professor Aronnax,” he answered me, “I don’t know what kind offearsome creature I’m up against, and I don’t want my frigate runningfoolish risks in all this darkness. Besides, how should we attack thisunknown creature, how should we defend ourselves against it? Let’swait for daylight, and then we’ll play a different role.”“You’ve no further doubts, commander, as to the nature of thisanimal?”“No, sir, it’s apparently a gigantic narwhale, and an electric one toboot.”“Maybe,” I added, “it’s no more approachable than an electric eel oran electric ray!”“Right,” the commander replied. “And if it has their power toelectrocute, it’s surely the most dreadful animal ever conceived byour Creator. That’s why I’ll keep on my guard, sir.”The whole crew stayed on their feet all night long. No one eventhought of sleeping. Unable to compete with the monster’s speed, theAbraham Lincoln slowed down and stayed at half steam. For its part,the narwhale mimicked the frigate, simply rode with the waves, andseemed determined not to forsake the field of battle.However, near midnight it disappeared, or to use a more appropriateexpression, “it went out,” like a huge glowworm. Had it fled from us?We were duty bound to fear so rather than hope so. But at 12:53 in themorning, a deafening hiss became audible, resembling the sound made bya waterspout expelled with tremendous intensity.By then Commander Farragut, Ned Land, and I were on the afterdeck,peering eagerly into the profound gloom.“Ned Land,” the commander asked, “you’ve often heard whalesbellowing?”“Often, sir, but never a whale like this, whose sighting earned me$2,000.00.”“Correct, the prize is rightfully yours. But tell me, isn’t that thenoise cetaceans make when they spurt water from their blowholes?”“The very noise, sir, but this one’s way louder. So there can be nomistake. There’s definitely a whale lurking in our waters. With yourpermission, sir,” the harpooner added, “tomorrow at daybreak we’llhave words with it.”“If it’s in a mood to listen to you, Mr. Land,” I replied in a tonefar from convinced.“Let me get within four harpoon lengths of it,” the Canadian shotback, “and it had better listen!”“But to get near it,” the commander went on, “I’d have to put awhaleboat at your disposal?”“Certainly, sir.”“That would be gambling with the lives of my men.”“And with my own!” the harpooner replied simply.Near two o’clock in the morning, the core of light reappeared, no lessintense, five miles to windward of the Abraham Lincoln. Despite thedistance, despite the noise of wind and sea, we could distinctly hearthe fearsome thrashings of the animal’s tail, and even its pantingbreath. Seemingly, the moment this enormous narwhale came up tobreathe at the surface of the ocean, air was sucked into its lungslike steam into the huge cylinders of a 2,000-horsepower engine.“Hmm!” I said to myself. “A cetacean as powerful as a whole cavalryregiment—now that’s a whale of a whale!”We stayed on the alert until daylight, getting ready foraction. Whaling gear was set up along the railings. Our chief officerloaded the blunderbusses, which can launch harpoons as far as a mile,and long duck guns with exploding bullets that can mortally wound eventhe most powerful animals. Ned Land was content to sharpen hisharpoon, a dreadful weapon in his hands.At six o’clock day began to break, and with the dawn’s early light,the narwhale’s electric glow disappeared. At seven o’clock the day waswell along, but a very dense morning mist shrank the horizon, and ourbest spyglasses were unable to pierce it. The outcome: disappointmentand anger.I hoisted myself up to the crosstrees of the mizzen sail. Someofficers were already perched on the mastheads.At eight o’clock the mist rolled ponderously over the waves, and itshuge curls were lifting little by little. The horizon grew wider andclearer all at once.Suddenly, just as on the previous evening, Ned Land’s voice wasaudible.“There’s the thing in question, astern to port!” the harpoonershouted.Every eye looked toward the point indicated.There, a mile and a half from the frigate, a long blackish bodyemerged a meter above the waves. Quivering violently, its tail wascreating a considerable eddy. Never had caudal equipment thrashed thesea with such power. An immense wake of glowing whiteness marked theanimal’s track, sweeping in a long curve.Our frigate drew nearer to the cetacean. I examined it with acompletely open mind. Those reports from the Shannon and the Helvetiahad slightly exaggerated its dimensions, and I put its length at only250 feet. Its girth was more difficult to judge, but all in all, theanimal seemed to be wonderfully proportioned in all three dimensions.While I was observing this phenomenal creature, two jets of steam andwater sprang from its blowholes and rose to an altitude of fortymeters, which settled for me its mode of breathing. From this Ifinally concluded that it belonged to the branch Vertebrata, classMammalia, subclass Monodelphia, group Pisciforma, order Cetacea,family . . . but here I couldn’t make up my mind. The order Cetaceaconsists of three families, baleen whales, sperm whales, dolphins, andit’s in this last group that narwhales are placed. Each of thesefamilies is divided into several genera, each genus into species, eachspecies into varieties. So I was still missing variety, species,genus, and family, but no doubt I would complete my classifying withthe aid of Heaven and Commander Farragut.The crew were waiting impatiently for orders from their leader. Thelatter, after carefully observing the animal, called for hisengineer. The engineer raced over.“Sir,” the commander said, “are you up to pressure?”“Aye, sir,” the engineer replied.“Fine. Stoke your furnaces and clap on full steam!”Three cheers greeted this order. The hour of battle had sounded. A fewmoments later, the frigate’s two funnels vomited torrents of blacksmoke, and its deck quaked from the trembling of its boilers.Driven forward by its powerful propeller, the Abraham Lincoln headedstraight for the animal. Unconcerned, the latter let us come withinhalf a cable length; then, not bothering to dive, it got up a littlespeed, retreated, and was content to keep its distance.This chase dragged on for about three-quarters of an hour without thefrigate gaining two fathoms on the cetacean. At this rate, it wasobvious that we would never catch up with it.Infuriated, Commander Farragut kept twisting the thick tuft of hairthat flourished below his chin.“Ned Land!” he called.The Canadian reported at once.“Well, Mr. Land,” the commander asked, “do you still advise putting mylongboats to sea?”“No, sir,” Ned Land replied, “because that beast won’t be caughtagainst its will.”“Then what should we do?”“Stoke up more steam, sir, if you can. As for me, with your permissionI’ll go perch on the bobstays under the bowsprit, and if we can getwithin a harpoon length, I’ll harpoon the brute.”“Go to it, Ned,” Commander Farragut replied. “Engineer,” he called,“keep the pressure mounting!”Ned Land made his way to his post. The furnaces were urged intogreater activity; our propeller did forty-three revolutions perminute, and steam shot from the valves. Heaving the log, we verifiedthat the Abraham Lincoln was going at the rate of 18.5 miles per hour.But that damned animal also did a speed of 18.5.For the next hour our frigate kept up this pace without gaining afathom! This was humiliating for one of the fastest racers in theAmerican navy. The crew were working up into a blind rage. Sailorafter sailor heaved insults at the monster, which couldn’t be botheredwith answering back. Commander Farragut was no longer content simplyto twist his goatee; he chewed on it.The engineer was summoned once again.“You’re up to maximum pressure?” the commander asked him.“Aye, sir,” the engineer replied.“And your valves are charged to . . . ?”“To six and a half atmospheres.”“Charge them to ten atmospheres.”A typical American order if I ever heard one. It would have soundedjust fine during some Mississippi paddle-wheeler race, to “outstripthe competition!”“Conseil,” I said to my gallant servant, now at my side, “you realizethat we’ll probably blow ourselves skyhigh?”“As master wishes!” Conseil replied.All right, I admit it: I did wish to run this risk!The valves were charged. More coal was swallowed by thefurnaces. Ventilators shot torrents of air over the braziers. TheAbraham Lincoln’s speed increased. Its masts trembled down to theirblocks, and swirls of smoke could barely squeeze through the narrowfunnels.We heaved the log a second time.“Well, helmsman?” Commander Farragut asked.“19.3 miles per hour, sir.”“Keep stoking the furnaces.”The engineer did so. The pressure gauge marked ten atmospheres. But nodoubt the cetacean itself had “warmed up,” because without the leasttrouble, it also did 19.3.What a chase! No, I can’t describe the excitement that shook my verybeing. Ned Land stayed at his post, harpoon in hand. Several times theanimal let us approach.“We’re overhauling it!” the Canadian would shout.Then, just as he was about to strike, the cetacean would steal offwith a swiftness I could estimate at no less than thirty miles perhour. And even at our maximum speed, it took the liberty of thumbingits nose at the frigate by running a full circle around us! A howl offury burst from every throat!By noon we were no farther along than at eight o’clock in the morning.Commander Farragut then decided to use more direct methods.“Bah!” he said. “So that animal is faster than the AbrahamLincoln. All right, we’ll see if it can outrun our conical shells!Mate, man the gun in the bow!”Our forecastle cannon was immediately loaded and leveled. Thecannoneer fired a shot, but his shell passed some feet above thecetacean, which stayed half a mile off.“Over to somebody with better aim!” the commander shouted. “And$500.00 to the man who can pierce that infernal beast!”Calm of eye, cool of feature, an old gray-bearded gunner—I can see himto this day—approached the cannon, put it in position, and took aimfor a good while. There was a mighty explosion, mingled with cheersfrom the crew.The shell reached its target; it hit the animal, but not in the usualfashion—it bounced off that rounded surface and vanished into the seatwo miles out.“Oh drat!” said the old gunner in his anger. “That rascal must becovered with six-inch armor plate!”“Curse the beast!” Commander Farragut shouted.The hunt was on again, and Commander Farragut leaned over to me,saying:“I’ll chase that animal till my frigate explodes!”“Yes,” I replied, “and nobody would blame you!”We could still hope that the animal would tire out and not be asinsensitive to exhaustion as our steam engines. But no such luck. Hourafter hour went by without it showing the least sign of weariness.However, to the Abraham Lincoln’s credit, it must be said that westruggled on with tireless persistence. I estimate that we covered adistance of at least 500 kilometers during this ill-fated day ofNovember 6. But night fell and wrapped the surging ocean in itsshadows.By then I thought our expedition had come to an end, that we wouldnever see this fantastic animal again. I was mistaken.At 10:50 in the evening, that electric light reappeared three miles towindward of the frigate, just as clear and intense as the nightbefore.The narwhale seemed motionless. Was it asleep perhaps, weary from itsworkday, just riding with the waves? This was our chance, andCommander Farragut was determined to take full advantage of it.He gave his orders. The Abraham Lincoln stayed at half steam,advancing cautiously so as not to awaken its adversary. In midoceanit’s not unusual to encounter whales so sound asleep they cansuccessfully be attacked, and Ned Land had harpooned more than one inits slumber. The Canadian went to resume his post on the bobstaysunder the bowsprit.The frigate approached without making a sound, stopped two cablelengths from the animal and coasted. Not a soul breathed on board. Aprofound silence reigned over the deck. We were not 100 feet from theblazing core of light, whose glow grew stronger and dazzled the eyes.Just then, leaning over the forecastle railing, I saw Ned Land belowme, one hand grasping the martingale, the other brandishing hisdreadful harpoon. Barely twenty feet separated him from the motionlessanimal.All at once his arm shot forward and the harpoon was launched. I heardthe weapon collide resonantly, as if it had hit some hard substance.The electric light suddenly went out, and two enormous waterspoutscrashed onto the deck of the frigate, racing like a torrent from stemto stern, toppling crewmen, breaking spare masts and yardarms fromtheir lashings.A hideous collision occurred, and thrown over the rail with no time tocatch hold of it, I was hurled into the sea.CHAPTER 7A Whale of Unknown SpeciesALTHOUGH I WAS startled by this unexpected descent, I at least have avery clear recollection of my sensations during it.At first I was dragged about twenty feet under. I’m a good swimmer,without claiming to equal such other authors as Byron and Edgar AllanPoe, who were master divers, and I didn’t lose my head on the waydown. With two vigorous kicks of the heel, I came back to the surfaceof the sea.My first concern was to look for the frigate. Had the crew seen me gooverboard? Was the Abraham Lincoln tacking about? Would CommanderFarragut put a longboat to sea? Could I hope to be rescued?The gloom was profound. I glimpsed a black mass disappearing eastward,where its running lights were fading out in the distance. It was thefrigate. I felt I was done for.“Help! Help!” I shouted, swimming desperately toward the AbrahamLincoln.My clothes were weighing me down. The water glued them to my body,they were paralyzing my movements. I was sinking! I was suffocating. . . !“Help!”This was the last shout I gave. My mouth was filling with water. Istruggled against being dragged into the depths. . . .Suddenly my clothes were seized by energetic hands, I felt myselfpulled abruptly back to the surface of the sea, and yes, I heard thesewords pronounced in my ear:“If master would oblige me by leaning on my shoulder, master will swimwith much greater ease.”With one hand I seized the arm of my loyal Conseil.“You!” I said. “You!”“Myself,” Conseil replied, “and at master’s command.”“That collision threw you overboard along with me?”“Not at all. But being in master’s employ, I followed master.”The fine lad thought this only natural!“What about the frigate?” I asked.“The frigate?” Conseil replied, rolling over on his back. “I thinkmaster had best not depend on it to any great extent!”“What are you saying?”“I’m saying that just as I jumped overboard, I heard the men at thehelm shout, ‘Our propeller and rudder are smashed!’ ”“Smashed?”“Yes, smashed by the monster’s tusk! I believe it’s the sole injurythe Abraham Lincoln has sustained. But most inconveniently for us, theship can no longer steer.”“Then we’re done for!”“Perhaps,” Conseil replied serenely. “However, we still have a fewhours before us, and in a few hours one can do a great many things!”Conseil’s unflappable composure cheered me up. I swam more vigorously,but hampered by clothes that were as restricting as a cloak made oflead, I was managing with only the greatest difficulty. Conseilnoticed as much.“Master will allow me to make an incision,” he said.And he slipped an open clasp knife under my clothes, slitting themfrom top to bottom with one swift stroke. Then he briskly undressed mewhile I swam for us both.I then did Conseil the same favor, and we continued to “navigate” sideby side.But our circumstances were no less dreadful. Perhaps they hadn’t seenus go overboard; and even if they had, the frigate—being undone by itsrudder—couldn’t return to leeward after us. So we could count only onits longboats.Conseil had coolly reasoned out this hypothesis and laid his plansaccordingly. An amazing character, this boy; in midocean, this stoiclad seemed right at home!So, having concluded that our sole chance for salvation lay in beingpicked up by the Abraham Lincoln’s longboats, we had to take steps towait for them as long as possible. Consequently, I decided to divideour energies so we wouldn’t both be worn out at the same time, andthis was the arrangement: while one of us lay on his back, stayingmotionless with arms crossed and legs outstretched, the other wouldswim and propel his partner forward. This towing role was to last nolonger than ten minutes, and by relieving each other in this way, wecould stay afloat for hours, perhaps even until daybreak.Slim chance, but hope springs eternal in the human breast! Besides,there were two of us. Lastly, I can vouch—as improbable as itseems—that even if I had wanted to destroy all my illusions, even if Ihad been willing to “give in to despair,” I could not have done so!The cetacean had rammed our frigate at about eleven o’clock in theevening. I therefore calculated on eight hours of swimming untilsunrise. A strenuous task, but feasible, thanks to our relieving eachother. The sea was pretty smooth and barely tired us. Sometimes Itried to peer through the dense gloom, which was broken only by thephosphorescent flickers coming from our movements. I stared at theluminous ripples breaking over my hands, shimmering sheets spatteredwith blotches of bluish gray. It seemed as if we’d plunged into a poolof quicksilver.Near one o’clock in the morning, I was overcome with tremendousexhaustion. My limbs stiffened in the grip of intense cramps. Conseilhad to keep me going, and attending to our self-preservation becamehis sole responsibility. I soon heard the poor lad gasping; hisbreathing became shallow and quick. I didn’t think he could stand suchexertions for much longer.“Go on! Go on!” I told him.“Leave master behind?” he replied. “Never! I’ll drown before he does!”Just then, past the fringes of a large cloud that the wind was drivingeastward, the moon appeared. The surface of the sea glistened underits rays. That kindly light rekindled our strength. I held up my headagain. My eyes darted to every point of the horizon. I spotted thefrigate. It was five miles from us and formed no more than a dark,barely perceptible mass. But as for longboats, not a one in sight!I tried to call out. What was the use at such a distance! My swollenlips wouldn’t let a single sound through. Conseil could stillarticulate a few words, and I heard him repeat at intervals:“Help! Help!”Ceasing all movement for an instant, we listened. And it may have beena ringing in my ear, from this organ filling with impeded blood, butit seemed to me that Conseil’s shout had received an answer back.“Did you hear that?” I muttered.“Yes, yes!”And Conseil hurled another desperate plea into space.This time there could be no mistake! A human voice had answered us!Was it the voice of some poor devil left behind in midocean, someother victim of that collision suffered by our ship? Or was it one ofthe frigate’s longboats, hailing us out of the gloom?Conseil made one final effort, and bracing his hands on my shoulders,while I offered resistance with one supreme exertion, he raisedhimself half out of the water, then fell back exhausted.“What did you see?”“I saw . . . ,” he muttered, “I saw . . . but we mustn’t talk. . . save our strength . . . !”What had he seen? Then, lord knows why, the thought of the monstercame into my head for the first time . . . ! But even so, that voice. . . ? Gone are the days when Jonahs took refuge in the bellies ofwhales!Nevertheless, Conseil kept towing me. Sometimes he looked up, staredstraight ahead, and shouted a request for directions, which wasanswered by a voice that was getting closer and closer. I could barelyhear it. I was at the end of my strength; my fingers gave out; myhands were no help to me; my mouth opened convulsively, filling withbrine; its coldness ran through me; I raised my head one last time,then I collapsed. . . .Just then something hard banged against me. I clung to it. Then I feltmyself being pulled upward, back to the surface of the water; my chestcaved in, and I fainted. . . .For certain, I came to quickly, because someone was massaging me sovigorously it left furrows in my flesh. I half opened my eyes. . . .“Conseil!” I muttered.“Did master ring for me?” Conseil replied.Just then, in the last light of a moon settling on the horizon, Ispotted a face that wasn’t Conseil’s but which I recognized at once.“Ned!” I exclaimed.“In person, sir, and still after his prize!” the Canadian replied.“You were thrown overboard after the frigate’s collision?”“Yes, professor, but I was luckier than you, and right away I was ableto set foot on this floating islet.”“Islet?”“Or in other words, on our gigantic narwhale.”“Explain yourself, Ned.”“It’s just that I soon realized why my harpoon got blunted andcouldn’t puncture its hide.”“Why, Ned, why?”“Because, professor, this beast is made of boilerplate steel!”At this point in my story, I need to get a grip on myself, reconstructexactly what I experienced, and make doubly sure of everything Iwrite.The Canadian’s last words caused a sudden upheaval in my brain. Iswiftly hoisted myself to the summit of this half-submerged creatureor object that was serving as our refuge. I tested it with myfoot. Obviously it was some hard, impenetrable substance, not the softmatter that makes up the bodies of our big marine mammals.But this hard substance could have been a bony carapace, like thosethat covered some prehistoric animals, and I might have left it atthat and classified this monster among such amphibious reptiles asturtles or alligators.Well, no. The blackish back supporting me was smooth and polished withno overlapping scales. On impact, it gave off a metallic sonority, andas incredible as this sounds, it seemed, I swear, to be made ofriveted plates.No doubts were possible! This animal, this monster, this naturalphenomenon that had puzzled the whole scientific world, that hadmuddled and misled the minds of seamen in both hemispheres, was, therecould be no escaping it, an even more astonishing phenomenon—aphenomenon made by the hand of man.Even if I had discovered that some fabulous, mythological creaturereally existed, it wouldn’t have given me such a terrific mentaljolt. It’s easy enough to accept that prodigious things can come fromour Creator. But to find, all at once, right before your eyes, thatthe impossible had been mysteriously achieved by man himself: thisstaggers the mind!But there was no question now. We were stretched out on the back ofsome kind of underwater boat that, as far as I could judge, boastedthe shape of an immense steel fish. Ned Land had clear views on theissue. Conseil and I could only line up behind him.“But then,” I said, “does this contraption contain some sort oflocomotive mechanism, and a crew to run it?”“Apparently,” the harpooner replied. “And yet for the three hours I’velived on this floating island, it hasn’t shown a sign of life.”“This boat hasn’t moved at all?”“No, Professor Aronnax. It just rides with the waves, but otherwise ithasn’t stirred.”“But we know that it’s certainly gifted with great speed. Now then,since an engine is needed to generate that speed, and a mechanic torun that engine, I conclude: we’re saved.”“Humph!” Ned Land put in, his tone denoting reservations.Just then, as if to take my side in the argument, a bubbling beganastern of this strange submersible—whose drive mechanism was obviouslya propeller—and the boat started to move. We barely had time to hangon to its topside, which emerged about eighty centimeters abovewater. Fortunately its speed was not excessive.“So long as it navigates horizontally,” Ned Land muttered, “I’ve nocomplaints. But if it gets the urge to dive, I wouldn’t give $2.00 formy hide!”The Canadian might have quoted a much lower price. So it wasimperative to make contact with whatever beings were confined insidethe plating of this machine. I searched its surface for an opening ora hatch, a “manhole,” to use the official term; but the lines ofrivets had been firmly driven into the sheet-iron joins and werestraight and uniform.Moreover, the moon then disappeared and left us in profounddarkness. We had to wait for daylight to find some way of gettinginside this underwater boat.So our salvation lay totally in the hands of the mysterious helmsmensteering this submersible, and if it made a dive, we were done for!But aside from this occurring, I didn’t doubt the possibility of ourmaking contact with them. In fact, if they didn’t produce their ownair, they inevitably had to make periodic visits to the surface of theocean to replenish their oxygen supply. Hence the need for someopening that put the boat’s interior in contact with the atmosphere.As for any hope of being rescued by Commander Farragut, that had to berenounced completely. We were being swept westward, and I estimatethat our comparatively moderate speed reached twelve miles perhour. The propeller churned the waves with mathematical regularity,sometimes emerging above the surface and throwing phosphorescent sprayto great heights.Near four o’clock in the morning, the submersible picked up speed. Wecould barely cope with this dizzying rush, and the waves battered usat close range. Fortunately Ned’s hands came across a big mooring ringfastened to the topside of this sheet-iron back, and we all held onfor dear life.Finally this long night was over. My imperfect memories won’t let merecall my every impression of it. A single detail comes back tome. Several times, during various lulls of wind and sea, I thought Iheard indistinct sounds, a sort of elusive harmony produced by distantmusical chords. What was the secret behind this underwater navigating,whose explanation the whole world had sought in vain? What beingslived inside this strange boat? What mechanical force allowed it tomove about with such prodigious speed?Daylight appeared. The morning mists surrounded us, but they soonbroke up. I was about to proceed with a careful examination of thehull, whose topside formed a sort of horizontal platform, when I feltit sinking little by little.“Oh, damnation!” Ned Land shouted, stamping his foot on the resonantsheet iron. “Open up there, you antisocial navigators!”But it was difficult to make yourself heard above the deafening beatsof the propeller. Fortunately this submerging movement stopped.From inside the boat, there suddenly came noises of iron fasteningspushed roughly aside. One of the steel plates flew up, a man appeared,gave a bizarre yell, and instantly disappeared.A few moments later, eight strapping fellows appeared silently, theirfaces like masks, and dragged us down into their fearsome machine.CHAPTER 8“Mobilis in Mobili”THIS BRUTALLY EXECUTED capture was carried out with lightningspeed. My companions and I had no time to collect ourselves. I don’tknow how they felt about being shoved inside this aquatic prison, butas for me, I was shivering all over. With whom were we dealing? Surelywith some new breed of pirates, exploiting the sea after their ownfashion.The narrow hatch had barely closed over me when I was surrounded byprofound darkness. Saturated with the outside light, my eyes couldn’tmake out a thing. I felt my naked feet clinging to the steps of aniron ladder. Forcibly seized, Ned Land and Conseil were behind me. Atthe foot of the ladder, a door opened and instantly closed behind uswith a loud clang.We were alone. Where? I couldn’t say, could barely even imagine. Allwas darkness, but such utter darkness that after several minutes, myeyes were still unable to catch a single one of those hazy gleams thatdrift through even the blackest nights.Meanwhile, furious at these goings on, Ned Land gave free rein to hisindignation.“Damnation!” he exclaimed. “These people are about as hospitable asthe savages of New Caledonia! All that’s lacking is for them to becannibals! I wouldn’t be surprised if they were, but believe you me,they won’t eat me without my kicking up a protest!”“Calm yourself, Ned my friend,” Conseil replied serenely. “Don’t flareup so quickly! We aren’t in a kettle yet!”“In a kettle, no,” the Canadian shot back, “but in an oven forsure. It’s dark enough for one. Luckily my Bowie knife hasn’t left me,and I can still see well enough to put it to use.* The first one ofthese bandits who lays a hand on me—”*Author’s Note: A Bowie knife is a wide-bladed dagger that Americansare forever carrying around.“Don’t be so irritable, Ned,” I then told the harpooner, “and don’truin things for us with pointless violence. Who knows whether theymight be listening to us? Instead, let’s try to find out where weare!”I started moving, groping my way. After five steps I encountered aniron wall made of riveted boilerplate. Then, turning around, I bumpedinto a wooden table next to which several stools had been set. Thefloor of this prison lay hidden beneath thick, hempen matting thatdeadened the sound of footsteps. Its naked walls didn’t reveal anytrace of a door or window. Going around the opposite way, Conseil metup with me, and we returned to the middle of this cabin, which had tobe twenty feet long by ten wide. As for its height, not even Ned Land,with his great stature, was able to determine it.Half an hour had already gone by without our situation changing, whenour eyes were suddenly spirited from utter darkness into blindinglight. Our prison lit up all at once; in other words, it filled withluminescent matter so intense that at first I couldn’t stand thebrightness of it. From its glare and whiteness, I recognized theelectric glow that had played around this underwater boat like somemagnificent phosphorescent phenomenon. After involuntarily closing myeyes, I reopened them and saw that this luminous force came from afrosted half globe curving out of the cabin’s ceiling.“Finally! It’s light enough to see!” Ned Land exclaimed, knife inhand, staying on the defensive.“Yes,” I replied, then ventured the opposite view. “But as for oursituation, we’re still in the dark.”“Master must learn patience,” said the emotionless Conseil.This sudden illumination of our cabin enabled me to examine itstiniest details. It contained only a table and five stools. Itsinvisible door must have been hermetically sealed. Not a sound reachedour ears. Everything seemed dead inside this boat. Was it in motion,or stationary on the surface of the ocean, or sinking into the depths?I couldn’t tell.But this luminous globe hadn’t been turned on without goodreason. Consequently, I hoped that some crewmen would soon make anappearance. If you want to consign people to oblivion, you don’t lightup their dungeons.I was not mistaken. Unlocking noises became audible, a door opened,and two men appeared.One was short and stocky, powerfully muscled, broad shouldered, robustof limbs, the head squat, the hair black and luxuriant, the mustacheheavy, the eyes bright and penetrating, and his whole personalitystamped with that southern-blooded zest that, in France, typifies thepeople of Provence. The philosopher Diderot has very aptly claimedthat a man’s bearing is the clue to his character, and this stockylittle man was certainly a living proof of this claim. You could sensethat his everyday conversation must have been packed with such vividfigures of speech as personification, symbolism, and misplacedmodifiers. But I was never in a position to verify this because,around me, he used only an odd and utterly incomprehensible dialect.The second stranger deserves a more detailed description. A discipleof such character-judging anatomists as Gratiolet or Engel could haveread this man’s features like an open book. Without hesitation, Iidentified his dominant qualities—self-confidence, since his headreared like a nobleman’s above the arc formed by the lines of hisshoulders, and his black eyes gazed with icy assurance; calmness,since his skin, pale rather than ruddy, indicated tranquility ofblood; energy, shown by the swiftly knitting muscles of his brow; andfinally courage, since his deep breathing denoted tremendous reservesof vitality.I might add that this was a man of great pride, that his calm, firmgaze seemed to reflect thinking on an elevated plane, and that theharmony of his facial expressions and bodily movements resulted in anoverall effect of unquestionable candor—according to the findings ofphysiognomists, those analysts of facial character.I felt “involuntarily reassured” in his presence, and this boded wellfor our interview.Whether this individual was thirty-five or fifty years of age, I couldnot precisely state. He was tall, his forehead broad, his nosestraight, his mouth clearly etched, his teeth magnificent, his handsrefined, tapered, and to use a word from palmistry, highly “psychic,”in other words, worthy of serving a lofty and passionate spirit. Thisman was certainly the most wonderful physical specimen I had everencountered. One unusual detail: his eyes were spaced a little farfrom each other and could instantly take in nearly a quarter of thehorizon. This ability—as I later verified—was strengthened by a rangeof vision even greater than Ned Land’s. When this stranger focused hisgaze on an object, his eyebrow lines gathered into a frown, his heavyeyelids closed around his pupils to contract his huge field of vision,and he looked! What a look—as if he could magnify objects shrinkinginto the distance; as if he could probe your very soul; as if he couldpierce those sheets of water so opaque to our eyes and scan thedeepest seas . . . !Wearing caps made of sea-otter fur, and shod in sealskin fishingboots, these two strangers were dressed in clothing made from someunique fabric that flattered the figure and allowed great freedom ofmovement.The taller of the two—apparently the leader on board—examined us withthe greatest care but without pronouncing a word. Then, turning to hiscompanion, he conversed with him in a language I didn’t recognize. Itwas a sonorous, harmonious, flexible dialect whose vowels seemed toundergo a highly varied accentuation.The other replied with a shake of the head and added two or threeutterly incomprehensible words. Then he seemed to question me directlywith a long stare.I replied in clear French that I wasn’t familiar with his language;but he didn’t seem to understand me, and the situation grew ratherbaffling.“Still, master should tell our story,” Conseil said to me. “Perhapsthese gentlemen will grasp a few words of it!”I tried again, telling the tale of our adventures, clearlyarticulating my every syllable, and not leaving out a single detail. Istated our names and titles; then, in order, I introduced ProfessorAronnax, his manservant Conseil, and Mr. Ned Land, harpooner.The man with calm, gentle eyes listened to me serenely, evencourteously, and paid remarkable attention. But nothing in his facialexpression indicated that he understood my story. When I finished, hedidn’t pronounce a single word.One resource still left was to speak English. Perhaps they would befamiliar with this nearly universal language. But I only knew it, as Idid the German language, well enough to read it fluently, not wellenough to speak it correctly. Here, however, our overriding need wasto make ourselves understood.“Come on, it’s your turn,” I told the harpooner. “Over to you,Mr. Land. Pull out of your bag of tricks the best English ever spokenby an Anglo-Saxon, and try for a more favorable result than mine.”Ned needed no persuading and started our story all over again, most ofwhich I could follow. Its content was the same, but the formdiffered. Carried away by his volatile temperament, the Canadian putgreat animation into it. He complained vehemently about beingimprisoned in defiance of his civil rights, asked by virtue of whichlaw he was hereby detained, invoked writs of habeas corpus, threatenedto press charges against anyone holding him in illegal custody,ranted, gesticulated, shouted, and finally conveyed by an expressivegesture that we were dying of hunger.This was perfectly true, but we had nearly forgotten the fact.Much to his amazement, the harpooner seemed no more intelligible thanI had been. Our visitors didn’t bat an eye. Apparently they wereengineers who understood the languages of neither the French physicistArago nor the English physicist Faraday.Thoroughly baffled after vainly exhausting our philological resources,I no longer knew what tactic to pursue, when Conseil told me:“If master will authorize me, I’ll tell the whole business in German.”“What! You know German?” I exclaimed.“Like most Flemish people, with all due respect to master.”“On the contrary, my respect is due you. Go to it, my boy.”And Conseil, in his serene voice, described for the third time thevarious vicissitudes of our story. But despite our narrator’s fineaccent and stylish turns of phrase, the German language met with nosuccess.Finally, as a last resort, I hauled out everything I could rememberfrom my early schooldays, and I tried to narrate our adventures inLatin. Cicero would have plugged his ears and sent me to the scullery,but somehow I managed to pull through. With the same negative result.This last attempt ultimately misfiring, the two strangers exchanged afew words in their incomprehensible language and withdrew, not evenfavoring us with one of those encouraging gestures that are used inevery country in the world. The door closed again.“This is outrageous!” Ned Land shouted, exploding for the twentiethtime. “I ask you! We speak French, English, German, and Latin to theserogues, and neither of them has the decency to even answer back!”“Calm down, Ned,” I told the seething harpooner. “Anger won’t get usanywhere.”“But professor,” our irascible companion went on, “can’t you see thatwe could die of hunger in this iron cage?”“Bah!” Conseil put in philosophically. “We can hold out a good whileyet!”“My friends,” I said, “we mustn’t despair. We’ve gotten out of tighterspots. So please do me the favor of waiting a bit before you form yourviews on the commander and crew of this boat.”“My views are fully formed,” Ned Land shot back. “They’re rogues!”“Oh good! And from what country?”“Roguedom!”“My gallant Ned, as yet that country isn’t clearly marked on maps ofthe world, but I admit that the nationality of these two strangers ishard to make out! Neither English, French, nor German, that’s all wecan say. But I’m tempted to think that the commander and his chiefofficer were born in the low latitudes. There must be southern bloodin them. But as to whether they’re Spaniards, Turks, Arabs, or EastIndians, their physical characteristics don’t give me enough to goon. And as for their speech, it’s utterly incomprehensible.”“That’s the nuisance in not knowing every language,” Conseil replied,“or the drawback in not having one universal language!”“Which would all go out the window!” Ned Land replied. “Don’t you see,these people have a language all to themselves, a language they’veinvented just to cause despair in decent people who ask for a littledinner! Why, in every country on earth, when you open your mouth, snapyour jaws, smack your lips and teeth, isn’t that the world’s mostunderstandable message? From Quebec to the Tuamotu Islands, from Paristo the Antipodes, doesn’t it mean: I’m hungry, give me a bite to eat!”“Oh,” Conseil put in, “there are some people so unintelligent bynature . . .”As he was saying these words, the door opened. A steward entered.* Hebrought us some clothes, jackets and sailor’s pants, made out of afabric whose nature I didn’t recognize. I hurried to change into them,and my companions followed suit.*Author’s Note: A steward is a waiter on board a steamer.Meanwhile our silent steward, perhaps a deaf-mute, set the table andlaid three place settings.“There’s something serious afoot,” Conseil said, “and it bodes well.”“Bah!” replied the rancorous harpooner. “What the devil do you supposethey eat around here? Turtle livers, loin of shark, dogfish steaks?”“We’ll soon find out!” Conseil said.Overlaid with silver dish covers, various platters had been neatlypositioned on the table cloth, and we sat down to eat. Assuredly, wewere dealing with civilized people, and if it hadn’t been for thiselectric light flooding over us, I would have thought we were in thedining room of the Hotel Adelphi in Liverpool, or the Grand Hotel inParis. However, I feel compelled to mention that bread and wine weretotally absent. The water was fresh and clear, but it was stillwater—which wasn’t what Ned Land had in mind. Among the foods we wereserved, I was able to identify various daintily dressed fish; but Icouldn’t make up my mind about certain otherwise excellent dishes, andI couldn’t even tell whether their contents belonged to the vegetableor the animal kingdom. As for the tableware, it was elegant and inperfect taste. Each utensil, spoon, fork, knife, and plate, bore onits reverse a letter encircled by a Latin motto, and here is its exactduplicate:MOBILIS IN MOBILINMoving within the moving element! It was a highly appropriate mottofor this underwater machine, so long as the preposition in istranslated as within and not upon. The letter N was no doubt theinitial of the name of that mystifying individual in command beneaththe seas!Ned and Conseil had no time for such musings. They were wolfing downtheir food, and without further ado I did the same. By now I feltreassured about our fate, and it seemed obvious that our hosts didn’tintend to let us die of starvation.But all earthly things come to an end, all things must pass, even thehunger of people who haven’t eaten for fifteen hours. Our appetitesappeased, we felt an urgent need for sleep. A natural reaction afterthat interminable night of fighting for our lives.“Ye gods, I’ll sleep soundly,” Conseil said.“Me, I’m out like a light!” Ned Land replied.My two companions lay down on the cabin’s carpeting and were soon deepin slumber.As for me, I gave in less readily to this intense need for sleep. Toomany thoughts had piled up in my mind, too many insoluble questionshad arisen, too many images were keeping my eyelids open! Where werewe? What strange power was carrying us along? I felt—or at least Ithought I did—the submersible sinking toward the sea’s lowerstrata. Intense nightmares besieged me. In these mysterious marinesanctuaries, I envisioned hosts of unknown animals, and thisunderwater boat seemed to be a blood relation of theirs: living,breathing, just as fearsome . . . ! Then my mind grew calmer, myimagination melted into hazy drowsiness, and I soon fell into anuneasy slumber.CHAPTER 9The Tantrums of Ned LandI HAVE NO IDEA how long this slumber lasted; but it must have been agood while, since we were completely over our exhaustion. I was thefirst one to wake up. My companions weren’t yet stirring and still layin their corners like inanimate objects.I had barely gotten up from my passably hard mattress when I felt mymind clear, my brain go on the alert. So I began a carefulreexamination of our cell.Nothing had changed in its interior arrangements. The prison was stilla prison and its prisoners still prisoners. But, taking advantage ofour slumber, the steward had cleared the table. Consequently, nothingindicated any forthcoming improvement in our situation, and Iseriously wondered if we were doomed to spend the rest of our lives inthis cage.This prospect seemed increasingly painful to me because, even thoughmy brain was clear of its obsessions from the night before, I wasfeeling an odd short-windedness in my chest. It was becoming hard forme to breathe. The heavy air was no longer sufficient for the fullplay of my lungs. Although our cell was large, we obviously had usedup most of the oxygen it contained. In essence, over an hour’s time asingle human being consumes all the oxygen found in 100 liters of air,at which point that air has become charged with a nearly equal amountof carbon dioxide and is no longer fit for breathing.So it was now urgent to renew the air in our prison, and no doubt theair in this whole underwater boat as well.Here a question popped into my head. How did the commander of thisaquatic residence go about it? Did he obtain air using chemicalmethods, releasing the oxygen contained in potassium chlorate byheating it, meanwhile absorbing the carbon dioxide with potassiumhydroxide? If so, he would have to keep up some kind of relationshipwith the shore, to come by the materials needed for such anoperation. Did he simply limit himself to storing the air inhigh-pressure tanks and then dispense it according to his crew’sneeds? Perhaps. Or, proceeding in a more convenient, more economical,and consequently more probable fashion, was he satisfied with merelyreturning to breathe at the surface of the water like a cetacean,renewing his oxygen supply every twenty-four hours? In any event,whatever his method was, it seemed prudent to me that he use thismethod without delay.In fact, I had already resorted to speeding up my inhalations in orderto extract from the cell what little oxygen it contained, whensuddenly I was refreshed by a current of clean air, scented with asalty aroma. It had to be a sea breeze, life-giving and charged withiodine! I opened my mouth wide, and my lungs glutted themselves on thefresh particles. At the same time, I felt a swaying, a rolling ofmoderate magnitude but definitely noticeable. This boat, thissheet-iron monster, had obviously just risen to the surface of theocean, there to breathe in good whale fashion. So the ship’s mode ofventilation was finally established.When I had absorbed a chestful of this clean air, I looked for theconduit—the “air carrier,” if you prefer—that allowed this beneficialinflux to reach us, and I soon found it. Above the door opened an airvent that let in a fresh current of oxygen, renewing the thin air inour cell.I had gotten to this point in my observations when Ned and Conseilwoke up almost simultaneously, under the influence of this revivingair purification. They rubbed their eyes, stretched their arms, andsprang to their feet.“Did master sleep well?” Conseil asked me with his perennial goodmanners.“Extremely well, my gallant lad,” I replied. “And how about you,Mr. Ned Land?”“Like a log, professor. But I must be imagining things, because itseems like I’m breathing a sea breeze!”A seaman couldn’t be wrong on this topic, and I told the Canadian whathad gone on while he slept.“Good!” he said. “That explains perfectly all that bellowing we heard,when our so-called narwhale lay in sight of the Abraham Lincoln.”“Perfectly, Mr. Land. It was catching its breath!”“Only I’ve no idea what time it is, Professor Aronnax, unless maybeit’s dinnertime?”“Dinnertime, my fine harpooner? I’d say at least breakfast time,because we’ve certainly woken up to a new day.”“Which indicates,” Conseil replied, “that we’ve spent twenty-fourhours in slumber.”“That’s my assessment,” I replied.“I won’t argue with you,” Ned Land answered. “But dinner or breakfast,that steward will be plenty welcome whether he brings the one or theother.”“The one and the other,” Conseil said.“Well put,” the Canadian replied. “We deserve two meals, and speakingfor myself, I’ll do justice to them both.”“All right, Ned, let’s wait and see!” I replied. “It’s clear thatthese strangers don’t intend to let us die of hunger, otherwise lastevening’s dinner wouldn’t make any sense.”“Unless they’re fattening us up!” Ned shot back.“I object,” I replied. “We have not fallen into the hands ofcannibals.”“Just because they don’t make a habit of it,” the Canadian replied inall seriousness, “doesn’t mean they don’t indulge from time totime. Who knows? Maybe these people have gone without fresh meat for along while, and in that case three healthy, well-built specimens likethe professor, his manservant, and me——”“Get rid of those ideas, Mr. Land,” I answered the harpooner. “Andabove all, don’t let them lead you to flare up against our hosts,which would only make our situation worse.”“Anyhow,” the harpooner said, “I’m as hungry as all Hades, and dinneror breakfast, not one puny meal has arrived!”“Mr. Land,” I answered, “we have to adapt to the schedule on board,and I imagine our stomachs are running ahead of the chief cook’sdinner bell.”“Well then, we’ll adjust our stomachs to the chef’s timetable!”Conseil replied serenely.“There you go again, Conseil my friend!” the impatient Canadian shotback. “You never allow yourself any displays of bile or attacks ofnerves! You’re everlastingly calm! You’d say your after-meal graceeven if you didn’t get any food for your before-meal blessing—andyou’d starve to death rather than complain!”“What good would it do?” Conseil asked.“Complaining doesn’t have to do good, it just feels good! And if thesepirates—I say pirates out of consideration for the professor’sfeelings, since he doesn’t want us to call them cannibals—if thesepirates think they’re going to smother me in this cage without hearingwhat cusswords spice up my outbursts, they’ve got another thinkcoming! Look here, Professor Aronnax, speak frankly. How long do youfigure they’ll keep us in this iron box?”“To tell the truth, friend Land, I know little more about it than youdo.”“But in a nutshell, what do you suppose is going on?”“My supposition is that sheer chance has made us privy to an importantsecret. Now then, if the crew of this underwater boat have a personalinterest in keeping that secret, and if their personal interest ismore important than the lives of three men, I believe that our veryexistence is in jeopardy. If such is not the case, then at the firstavailable opportunity, this monster that has swallowed us will returnus to the world inhabited by our own kind.”“Unless they recruit us to serve on the crew,” Conseil said, “and keepus here—”“Till the moment,” Ned Land answered, “when some frigate that’s fasteror smarter than the Abraham Lincoln captures this den of buccaneers,then hangs all of us by the neck from the tip of a mainmast yardarm!”“Well thought out, Mr. Land,” I replied. “But as yet, I don’t believewe’ve been tendered any enlistment offers. Consequently, it’spointless to argue about what tactics we should pursue in such acase. I repeat: let’s wait, let’s be guided by events, and let’s donothing, since right now there’s nothing we can do.”“On the contrary, professor,” the harpooner replied, not wanting togive in. “There is something we can do.”“Oh? And what, Mr. Land?”“Break out of here!”“Breaking out of a prison on shore is difficult enough, but with anunderwater prison, it strikes me as completely unworkable.”“Come now, Ned my friend,” Conseil asked, “how would you answermaster’s objection? I refuse to believe that an American is at the endof his tether.”Visibly baffled, the harpooner said nothing. Under the conditions inwhich fate had left us, it was absolutely impossible to escape. But aCanadian’s wit is half French, and Mr. Ned Land made this clear in hisreply.“So, Professor Aronnax,” he went on after thinking for a few moments,“you haven’t figured out what people do when they can’t escape fromtheir prison?”“No, my friend.”“Easy. They fix things so they stay there.”“Of course!” Conseil put in. “Since we’re deep in the ocean, beinginside this boat is vastly preferable to being above it or below it!”“But we fix things by kicking out all the jailers, guards, andwardens,” Ned Land added.“What’s this, Ned?” I asked. “You’d seriously consider taking overthis craft?”“Very seriously,” the Canadian replied.“It’s impossible.”“And why is that, sir? Some promising opportunity might come up, and Idon’t see what could stop us from taking advantage of it. If there areonly about twenty men on board this machine, I don’t think they canstave off two Frenchmen and a Canadian!”It seemed wiser to accept the harpooner’s proposition than to debateit. Accordingly, I was content to reply:“Let such circumstances come, Mr. Land, and we’ll see. But until then,I beg you to control your impatience. We need to act shrewdly, andyour flare-ups won’t give rise to any promising opportunities. Soswear to me that you’ll accept our situation without throwing atantrum over it.”“I give you my word, professor,” Ned Land replied in an unenthusiastictone. “No vehement phrases will leave my mouth, no vicious gestureswill give my feelings away, not even when they don’t feed us on time.”“I have your word, Ned,” I answered the Canadian.Then our conversation petered out, and each of us withdrew into hisown thoughts. For my part, despite the harpooner’s confident talk, Iadmit that I entertained no illusions. I had no faith in thosepromising opportunities that Ned Land mentioned. To operate with suchefficiency, this underwater boat had to have a sizeable crew, so if itcame to a physical contest, we would be facing an overwhelmingopponent. Besides, before we could do anything, we had to be free, andthat we definitely were not. I didn’t see any way out of thissheet-iron, hermetically sealed cell. And if the strange commander ofthis boat did have a secret to keep—which seemed rather likely—hewould never give us freedom of movement aboard his vessel. Now then,would he resort to violence in order to be rid of us, or would he dropus off one day on some remote coast? There lay the unknown. All thesehypotheses seemed extremely plausible to me, and to hope for freedomthrough use of force, you had to be a harpooner.I realized, moreover, that Ned Land’s brooding was getting him madderby the minute. Little by little, I heard those aforesaid cusswordswelling up in the depths of his gullet, and I saw his movements turnthreatening again. He stood up, pacing in circles like a wild beast ina cage, striking the walls with his foot and fist. Meanwhile the hourspassed, our hunger nagged unmercifully, and this time the steward didnot appear. Which amounted to forgetting our castaway status for muchtoo long, if they really had good intentions toward us.Tortured by the growling of his well-built stomach, Ned Land wasgetting more and more riled, and despite his word of honor, I was inreal dread of an explosion when he stood in the presence of one of themen on board.For two more hours Ned Land’s rage increased. The Canadian shouted andpleaded, but to no avail. The sheet-iron walls were deaf. I didn’thear a single sound inside this dead-seeming boat. The vessel hadn’tstirred, because I obviously would have felt its hull vibrating underthe influence of the propeller. It had undoubtedly sunk into thewatery deep and no longer belonged to the outside world. All thisdismal silence was terrifying.As for our neglect, our isolation in the depths of this cell, I wasafraid to guess at how long it might last. Little by little, hopes Ihad entertained after our interview with the ship’s commander werefading away. The gentleness of the man’s gaze, the generosityexpressed in his facial features, the nobility of his bearing, allvanished from my memory. I saw this mystifying individual anew forwhat he inevitably must be: cruel and merciless. I viewed him asoutside humanity, beyond all feelings of compassion, the implacablefoe of his fellow man, toward whom he must have sworn an undying hate!But even so, was the man going to let us die of starvation, locked upin this cramped prison, exposed to those horrible temptations to whichpeople are driven by extreme hunger? This grim possibility took on adreadful intensity in my mind, and fired by my imagination, I felt anunreasoning terror run through me. Conseil stayed calm. Ned Landbellowed.Just then a noise was audible outside. Footsteps rang on the metaltiling. The locks were turned, the door opened, the steward appeared.Before I could make a single movement to prevent him, the Canadianrushed at the poor man, threw him down, held him by the throat. Thesteward was choking in the grip of those powerful hands.Conseil was already trying to loosen the harpooner’s hands from hishalf-suffocated victim, and I had gone to join in the rescue, when Iwas abruptly nailed to the spot by these words pronounced in French:“Calm down, Mr. Land! And you, professor, kindly listen to me!”CHAPTER 10The Man of the WatersIT WAS THE ship’s commander who had just spoken.At these words Ned Land stood up quickly. Nearly strangled, thesteward staggered out at a signal from his superior; but such was thecommander’s authority aboard his vessel, not one gesture gave away theresentment that this man must have felt toward the Canadian. Insilence we waited for the outcome of this scene; Conseil, in spite ofhimself, seemed almost fascinated, I was stunned.Arms crossed, leaning against a corner of the table, the commanderstudied us with great care. Was he reluctant to speak further? Did heregret those words he had just pronounced in French? You would havethought so.After a few moments of silence, which none of us would have dreamed ofinterrupting:“Gentlemen,” he said in a calm, penetrating voice, “I speak French,English, German, and Latin with equal fluency. Hence I could haveanswered you as early as our initial interview, but first I wanted tomake your acquaintance and then think things over. Your four versionsof the same narrative, perfectly consistent by and large, establishedyour personal identities for me. I now know that sheer chance hasplaced in my presence Professor Pierre Aronnax, specialist in naturalhistory at the Paris Museum and entrusted with a scientific missionabroad, his manservant Conseil, and Ned Land, a harpooner of Canadianorigin aboard the Abraham Lincoln, a frigate in the national navy ofthe United States of America.”I bowed in agreement. The commander hadn’t put a question to me. So noanswer was called for. This man expressed himself with perfect easeand without a trace of an accent. His phrasing was clear, his wordswell chosen, his facility in elocution remarkable. And yet, to me, hedidn’t have “the feel” of a fellow countryman.He went on with the conversation as follows:“No doubt, sir, you’ve felt that I waited rather too long beforepaying you this second visit. After discovering your identities, Iwanted to weigh carefully what policy to pursue toward you. I hadgreat difficulty deciding. Some extremely inconvenient circumstanceshave brought you into the presence of a man who has cut himself offfrom humanity. Your coming has disrupted my whole existence.”“Unintentionally,” I said.“Unintentionally?” the stranger replied, raising his voice alittle. “Was it unintentionally that the Abraham Lincoln hunted me onevery sea? Was it unintentionally that you traveled aboard thatfrigate? Was it unintentionally that your shells bounced off my ship’shull? Was it unintentionally that Mr. Ned Land hit me with hisharpoon?”I detected a controlled irritation in these words. But there was aperfectly natural reply to these charges, and I made it.“Sir,” I said, “you’re surely unaware of the discussions that havetaken place in Europe and America with yourself as the subject. Youdon’t realize that various accidents, caused by collisions with yourunderwater machine, have aroused public passions on those twocontinents. I’ll spare you the innumerable hypotheses with which we’vetried to explain this inexplicable phenomenon, whose secret is yoursalone. But please understand that the Abraham Lincoln chased you overthe Pacific high seas in the belief it was hunting some powerfulmarine monster, which had to be purged from the ocean at all cost.”A half smile curled the commander’s lips; then, in a calmer tone:“Professor Aronnax,” he replied, “do you dare claim that your frigatewouldn’t have chased and cannonaded an underwater boat as readily as amonster?”This question baffled me, since Commander Farragut would certainlyhave shown no such hesitation. He would have seen it as his sworn dutyto destroy a contrivance of this kind just as promptly as a giganticnarwhale.“So you understand, sir,” the stranger went on, “that I have a rightto treat you as my enemy.”I kept quiet, with good reason. What was the use of debating such aproposition, when superior force can wipe out the best arguments?“It took me a good while to decide,” the commander went on. “Nothingobliged me to grant you hospitality. If I were to part company withyou, I’d have no personal interest in ever seeing you again. I couldput you back on the platform of this ship that has served as yourrefuge. I could sink under the sea, and I could forget you everexisted. Wouldn’t that be my right?”“Perhaps it would be the right of a savage,” I replied. “But not thatof a civilized man.”“Professor,” the commander replied swiftly, “I’m not what you term acivilized man! I’ve severed all ties with society, for reasons that Ialone have the right to appreciate. Therefore I obey none of itsregulations, and I insist that you never invoke them in front of me!”This was plain speaking. A flash of anger and scorn lit up thestranger’s eyes, and I glimpsed a fearsome past in this man’slife. Not only had he placed himself beyond human laws, he hadrendered himself independent, out of all reach, free in the strictestsense of the word! For who would dare chase him to the depths of thesea when he thwarted all attacks on the surface? What ship couldwithstand a collision with his underwater Monitor? What armor plate,no matter how heavy, could bear the thrusts of his spur? No man amongmen could call him to account for his actions. God, if he believed inHim, his conscience if he had one—these were the only judges to whomhe was answerable.These thoughts swiftly crossed my mind while this strange individualfell silent, like someone completely self-absorbed. I regarded himwith a mixture of fear and fascination, in the same way, no doubt,that Oedipus regarded the Sphinx.After a fairly long silence, the commander went on with ourconversation.“So I had difficulty deciding,” he said. “But I concluded that mypersonal interests could be reconciled with that natural compassion towhich every human being has a right. Since fate has brought you here,you’ll stay aboard my vessel. You’ll be free here, and in exchange forthat freedom, moreover totally related to it, I’ll lay on you just onecondition. Your word that you’ll submit to it will be sufficient.”“Go on, sir,” I replied. “I assume this condition is one an honest mancan accept?”“Yes, sir. Just this. It’s possible that certain unforeseen events mayforce me to confine you to your cabins for some hours, or even forsome days as the case may be. Since I prefer never to use violence, Iexpect from you in such a case, even more than in any other, yourunquestioning obedience. By acting in this way, I shield you fromcomplicity, I absolve you of all responsibility, since I myself makeit impossible for you to see what you aren’t meant to see. Do youaccept this condition?”So things happened on board that were quite odd to say the least,things never to be seen by people not placing themselves beyondsociety’s laws! Among all the surprises the future had in store forme, this would not be the mildest.“We accept,” I replied. “Only, I’ll ask your permission, sir, toaddress a question to you, just one.”“Go ahead, sir.”“You said we’d be free aboard your vessel?”“Completely.”“Then I would ask what you mean by this freedom.”“Why, the freedom to come, go, see, and even closely observeeverything happening here—except under certain rare circumstances—inshort, the freedom we ourselves enjoy, my companions and I.”It was obvious that we did not understand each other.“Pardon me, sir,” I went on, “but that’s merely the freedom that everyprisoner has, the freedom to pace his cell! That’s not enough for us.”“Nevertheless, it will have to do!”“What! We must give up seeing our homeland, friends, and relativesever again?”“Yes, sir. But giving up that intolerable earthly yoke that some mencall freedom is perhaps less painful than you think!”“By thunder!” Ned Land shouted. “I’ll never promise I won’t trygetting out of here!”“I didn’t ask for such a promise, Mr. Land,” the commander repliedcoldly.“Sir,” I replied, flaring up in spite of myself, “you’re taking unfairadvantage of us! This is sheer cruelty!”“No, sir, it’s an act of mercy! You’re my prisoners of war! I’ve caredfor you when, with a single word, I could plunge you back into theocean depths! You attacked me! You’ve just stumbled on a secret noliving man must probe, the secret of my entire existence! Do you thinkI’ll send you back to a world that must know nothing more of me?Never! By keeping you on board, it isn’t you whom I care for, it’sme!”These words indicated that the commander pursued a policy imperviousto arguments.“Then, sir,” I went on, “you give us, quite simply, a choice betweenlife and death?”“Quite simply.”“My friends,” I said, “to a question couched in these terms, ouranswer can be taken for granted. But no solemn promises bind us to thecommander of this vessel.”“None, sir,” the stranger replied.Then, in a gentler voice, he went on:“Now, allow me to finish what I have to tell you. I’ve heard of you,Professor Aronnax. You, if not your companions, won’t perhaps complaintoo much about the stroke of fate that has brought us together. Amongthe books that make up my favorite reading, you’ll find the workyou’ve published on the great ocean depths. I’ve pored over it. You’vetaken your studies as far as terrestrial science can go. But you don’tknow everything because you haven’t seen everything. Let me tell you,professor, you won’t regret the time you spend aboard myvessel. You’re going to voyage through a land of wonders. Stunnedamazement will probably be your habitual state of mind. It will be along while before you tire of the sights constantly before youreyes. I’m going to make another underwater tour of the world—perhapsmy last, who knows?—and I’ll review everything I’ve studied in thedepths of these seas that I’ve crossed so often, and you can be myfellow student. Starting this very day, you’ll enter a new element,you’ll see what no human being has ever seen before—since my men and Ino longer count—and thanks to me, you’re going to learn the ultimatesecrets of our planet.”I can’t deny it; the commander’s words had a tremendous effect onme. He had caught me on my weak side, and I momentarily forgot thatnot even this sublime experience was worth the loss of myfreedom. Besides, I counted on the future to resolve this importantquestion. So I was content to reply:“Sir, even though you’ve cut yourself off from humanity, I can seethat you haven’t disowned all human feeling. We’re castaways whomyou’ve charitably taken aboard, we’ll never forget that. Speaking formyself, I don’t rule out that the interests of science could overrideeven the need for freedom, which promises me that, in exchange, ourencounter will provide great rewards.”I thought the commander would offer me his hand, to seal ouragreement. He did nothing of the sort. I regretted that.“One last question,” I said, just as this inexplicable being seemedready to withdraw.“Ask it, professor.”“By what name am I to call you?”“Sir,” the commander replied, “to you, I’m simply Captain Nemo;* tome, you and your companions are simply passengers on the Nautilus.”*Latin: nemo means “no one.” Ed.Captain Nemo called out. A steward appeared. The captain gave him hisorders in that strange language I couldn’t even identify. Then,turning to the Canadian and Conseil:“A meal is waiting for you in your cabin,” he told them. “Kindlyfollow this man.”“That’s an offer I can’t refuse!” the harpooner replied.After being confined for over thirty hours, he and Conseil werefinally out of this cell.“And now, Professor Aronnax, our own breakfast is ready. Allow me tolead the way.”“Yours to command, captain.”I followed Captain Nemo, and as soon as I passed through the doorway,I went down a kind of electrically lit passageway that resembled agangway on a ship. After a stretch of some ten meters, a second dooropened before me.I then entered a dining room, decorated and furnished in austere goodtaste. Inlaid with ebony trim, tall oaken sideboards stood at bothends of this room, and sparkling on their shelves were staggered rowsof earthenware, porcelain, and glass of incalculable value. Theresilver-plated dinnerware gleamed under rays pouring from lightfixtures in the ceiling, whose glare was softened and tempered bydelicately painted designs.In the center of this room stood a table, richly spread. Captain Nemoindicated the place I was to occupy.“Be seated,” he told me, “and eat like the famished man you must be.”Our breakfast consisted of several dishes whose contents were allsupplied by the sea, and some foods whose nature and derivation wereunknown to me. They were good, I admit, but with a peculiar flavor towhich I would soon grow accustomed. These various food items seemed tobe rich in phosphorous, and I thought that they, too, must have beenof marine origin.Captain Nemo stared at me. I had asked him nothing, but he read mythoughts, and on his own he answered the questions I was itching toaddress him.“Most of these dishes are new to you,” he told me. “But you canconsume them without fear. They’re healthy and nourishing. I renouncedterrestrial foods long ago, and I’m none the worse for it. My crew arestrong and full of energy, and they eat what I eat.”“So,” I said, “all these foods are products of the sea?”“Yes, professor, the sea supplies all my needs. Sometimes I cast mynets in our wake, and I pull them up ready to burst. Sometimes I gohunting right in the midst of this element that has long seemed so farout of man’s reach, and I corner the game that dwells in my underwaterforests. Like the flocks of old Proteus, King Neptune’s shepherd, myherds graze without fear on the ocean’s immense prairies. There I ownvast properties that I harvest myself, and which are forever sown bythe hand of the Creator of All Things.”I stared at Captain Nemo in definite astonishment, and I answered him:“Sir, I understand perfectly how your nets can furnish excellent fishfor your table; I understand less how you can chase aquatic game inyour underwater forests; but how a piece of red meat, no matter howsmall, can figure in your menu, that I don’t understand at all.”“Nor I, sir,” Captain Nemo answered me. “I never touch the flesh ofland animals.”“Nevertheless, this . . . ,” I went on, pointing to a dish where someslices of loin were still left.“What you believe to be red meat, professor, is nothing other thanloin of sea turtle. Similarly, here are some dolphin livers you mightmistake for stewed pork. My chef is a skillful food processor whoexcels at pickling and preserving these various exhibits from theocean. Feel free to sample all of these foods. Here are some preservesof sea cucumber that a Malaysian would declare to be unrivaled in theentire world, here’s cream from milk furnished by the udders ofcetaceans, and sugar from the huge fucus plants in the North Sea; andfinally, allow me to offer you some marmalade of sea anemone, equal tothat from the tastiest fruits.”So I sampled away, more as a curiosity seeker than an epicure, whileCaptain Nemo delighted me with his incredible anecdotes.“But this sea, Professor Aronnax,” he told me, “this prodigious,inexhaustible wet nurse of a sea not only feeds me, she dresses me aswell. That fabric covering you was woven from the masses of filamentsthat anchor certain seashells; as the ancients were wont to do, it wasdyed with purple ink from the murex snail and shaded with violet tintsthat I extract from a marine slug, the Mediterranean sea hare. Theperfumes you’ll find on the washstand in your cabin were produced fromthe oozings of marine plants. Your mattress was made from the ocean’ssoftest eelgrass. Your quill pen will be whalebone, your ink a juicesecreted by cuttlefish or squid. Everything comes to me from the sea,just as someday everything will return to it!”“You love the sea, captain.”“Yes, I love it! The sea is the be all and end all! It coversseven-tenths of the planet earth. Its breath is clean andhealthy. It’s an immense wilderness where a man is never lonely,because he feels life astir on every side. The sea is simply thevehicle for a prodigious, unearthly mode of existence; it’s simplymovement and love; it’s living infinity, as one of your poets putit. And in essence, professor, nature is here made manifest by allthree of her kingdoms, mineral, vegetable, and animal. The last ofthese is amply represented by the four zoophyte groups, three classesof articulates, five classes of mollusks, and three vertebrateclasses: mammals, reptiles, and those countless legions of fish, aninfinite order of animals totaling more than 13,000 species, of whichonly one-tenth belong to fresh water. The sea is a vast pool ofnature. Our globe began with the sea, so to speak, and who can say wewon’t end with it! Here lies supreme tranquility. The sea doesn’tbelong to tyrants. On its surface they can still exercise theiriniquitous claims, battle each other, devour each other, haul everyearthly horror. But thirty feet below sea level, their dominionceases, their influence fades, their power vanishes! Ah, sir, live!Live in the heart of the seas! Here alone lies independence! Here Irecognize no superiors! Here I’m free!”Captain Nemo suddenly fell silent in the midst of this enthusiasticoutpouring. Had he let himself get carried away, past the bounds ofhis habitual reserve? Had he said too much? For a few moments hestrolled up and down, all aquiver. Then his nerves grew calmer, hisfacial features recovered their usual icy composure, and turning tome:“Now, professor,” he said, “if you’d like to inspect the Nautilus, I’myours to command.”CHAPTER 11The NautilusCAPTAIN NEMO stood up. I followed him. Contrived at the rear of thedining room, a double door opened, and I entered a room whosedimensions equaled the one I had just left.It was a library. Tall, black-rosewood bookcases, inlaid withcopperwork, held on their wide shelves a large number of uniformlybound books. These furnishings followed the contours of the room,their lower parts leading to huge couches upholstered in maroonleather and curved for maximum comfort. Light, movable reading stands,which could be pushed away or pulled near as desired, allowed books tobe positioned on them for easy study. In the center stood a huge tablecovered with pamphlets, among which some newspapers, long out of date,were visible. Electric light flooded this whole harmonious totality,falling from four frosted half globes set in the scrollwork of theceiling. I stared in genuine wonderment at this room so ingeniouslylaid out, and I couldn’t believe my eyes.“Captain Nemo,” I told my host, who had just stretched out on a couch,“this is a library that would do credit to more than one continentalpalace, and I truly marvel to think it can go with you into thedeepest seas.”“Where could one find greater silence or solitude, professor?” CaptainNemo replied. “Did your study at the museum afford you such a perfectretreat?”“No, sir, and I might add that it’s quite a humble one next toyours. You own 6,000 or 7,000 volumes here . . .”“12,000, Professor Aronnax. They’re my sole remaining ties with dryland. But I was done with the shore the day my Nautilus submerged forthe first time under the waters. That day I purchased my last volumes,my last pamphlets, my last newspapers, and ever since I’ve chosen tobelieve that humanity no longer thinks or writes. In any event,professor, these books are at your disposal, and you may use themfreely.”I thanked Captain Nemo and approached the shelves of thislibrary. Written in every language, books on science, ethics, andliterature were there in abundance, but I didn’t see a single work oneconomics—they seemed to be strictly banned on board. One odd detail:all these books were shelved indiscriminately without regard to thelanguage in which they were written, and this jumble proved that theNautilus’s captain could read fluently whatever volumes he chanced topick up.Among these books I noted masterpieces by the greats of ancient andmodern times, in other words, all of humanity’s finest achievements inhistory, poetry, fiction, and science, from Homer to Victor Hugo, fromXenophon to Michelet, from Rabelais to Madame George Sand. Butscience, in particular, represented the major investment of thislibrary: books on mechanics, ballistics, hydrography, meteorology,geography, geology, etc., held a place there no less important thanworks on natural history, and I realized that they made up thecaptain’s chief reading. There I saw the complete works of Humboldt,the complete Arago, as well as works by Foucault, Henri Sainte-ClaireDeville, Chasles, Milne-Edwards, Quatrefages, John Tyndall, Faraday,Berthelot, Father Secchi, Petermann, Commander Maury, Louis Agassiz,etc., plus the transactions of France’s Academy of Sciences, bulletinsfrom the various geographical societies, etc., and in a primelocation, those two volumes on the great ocean depths that had perhapsearned me this comparatively charitable welcome from CaptainNemo. Among the works of Joseph Bertrand, his book entitled TheFounders of Astronomy even gave me a definite date; and since I knewit had appeared in the course of 1865, I concluded that the fittingout of the Nautilus hadn’t taken place before then. Accordingly, threeyears ago at the most, Captain Nemo had begun his underwaterexistence. Moreover, I hoped some books even more recent would permitme to pinpoint the date precisely; but I had plenty of time to lookfor them, and I didn’t want to put off any longer our stroll throughthe wonders of the Nautilus.“Sir,” I told the captain, “thank you for placing this library at mydisposal. There are scientific treasures here, and I’ll take advantageof them.”“This room isn’t only a library,” Captain Nemo said, “it’s also asmoking room.”“A smoking room?” I exclaimed. “Then one may smoke on board?”“Surely.”“In that case, sir, I’m forced to believe that you’ve kept uprelations with Havana.”“None whatever,” the captain replied. “Try this cigar, ProfessorAronnax, and even though it doesn’t come from Havana, it will satisfyyou if you’re a connoisseur.”I took the cigar offered me, whose shape recalled those from Cuba; butit seemed to be made of gold leaf. I lit it at a small braziersupported by an elegant bronze stand, and I inhaled my first whiffswith the relish of a smoker who hasn’t had a puff in days.“It’s excellent,” I said, “but it’s not from the tobacco plant.”“Right,” the captain replied, “this tobacco comes from neither Havananor the Orient. It’s a kind of nicotine-rich seaweed that the oceansupplies me, albeit sparingly. Do you still miss your Cubans, sir?”“Captain, I scorn them from this day forward.”“Then smoke these cigars whenever you like, without debating theirorigin. They bear no government seal of approval, but I imaginethey’re none the worse for it.”“On the contrary.”Just then Captain Nemo opened a door facing the one by which I hadentered the library, and I passed into an immense, splendidly litlounge.It was a huge quadrilateral with canted corners, ten meters long, sixwide, five high. A luminous ceiling, decorated with delicatearabesques, distributed a soft, clear daylight over all the wondersgathered in this museum. For a museum it truly was, in which cleverhands had spared no expense to amass every natural and artistictreasure, displaying them with the helter-skelter picturesqueness thatdistinguishes a painter’s studio.Some thirty pictures by the masters, uniformly framed and separated bygleaming panoplies of arms, adorned walls on which were stretchedtapestries of austere design. There I saw canvases of the highestvalue, the likes of which I had marveled at in private Europeancollections and art exhibitions. The various schools of the oldmasters were represented by a Raphael Madonna, a Virgin by Leonardo daVinci, a nymph by Correggio, a woman by Titian, an adoration of theMagi by Veronese, an assumption of the Virgin by Murillo, a Holbeinportrait, a monk by Velazquez, a martyr by Ribera, a village fair byRubens, two Flemish landscapes by Teniers, three little genrepaintings by Gerard Dow, Metsu, and Paul Potter, two canvases byGericault and Prud’hon, plus seascapes by Backhuysen and Vernet. Amongthe works of modern art were pictures signed by Delacroix, Ingres,Decamps, Troyon, Meissonier, Daubigny, etc., and some wonderfulminiature statues in marble or bronze, modeled after antiquity’sfinest originals, stood on their pedestals in the corners of thismagnificent museum. As the Nautilus’s commander had predicted, my mindwas already starting to fall into that promised state of stunnedamazement.“Professor,” this strange man then said, “you must excuse theinformality with which I receive you, and the disorder reigning inthis lounge.”“Sir,” I replied, “without prying into who you are, might I venture toidentify you as an artist?”“A collector, sir, nothing more. Formerly I loved acquiring thesebeautiful works created by the hand of man. I sought them greedily,ferreted them out tirelessly, and I’ve been able to gather someobjects of great value. They’re my last mementos of those shores thatare now dead for me. In my eyes, your modern artists are already asold as the ancients. They’ve existed for 2,000 or 3,000 years, and Imix them up in my mind. The masters are ageless.”“What about these composers?” I said, pointing to sheet music byWeber, Rossini, Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, Meyerbeer, Hérold, Wagner,Auber, Gounod, Victor Massé, and a number of others scattered over afull size piano-organ, which occupied one of the wall panels in thislounge.“These composers,” Captain Nemo answered me, “are the contemporariesof Orpheus, because in the annals of the dead, all chronologicaldifferences fade; and I’m dead, professor, quite as dead as thosefriends of yours sleeping six feet under!”Captain Nemo fell silent and seemed lost in reverie. I regarded himwith intense excitement, silently analyzing his strange facialexpression. Leaning his elbow on the corner of a valuable mosaictable, he no longer saw me, he had forgotten my very presence.I didn’t disturb his meditations but continued to pass in review thecuriosities that enriched this lounge.After the works of art, natural rarities predominated. They consistedchiefly of plants, shells, and other exhibits from the ocean that musthave been Captain Nemo’s own personal finds. In the middle of thelounge, a jet of water, electrically lit, fell back into a basin madefrom a single giant clam. The delicately festooned rim of this shell,supplied by the biggest mollusk in the class Acephala, measured aboutsix meters in circumference; so it was even bigger than those finegiant clams given to King François I by the Republic of Venice, andwhich the Church of Saint-Sulpice in Paris has made into two giganticholy-water fonts.Around this basin, inside elegant glass cases fastened with copperbands, there were classified and labeled the most valuable marineexhibits ever put before the eyes of a naturalist. My professorialglee may easily be imagined.The zoophyte branch offered some very unusual specimens from its twogroups, the polyps and the echinoderms. In the first group: organ-pipecoral, gorgonian coral arranged into fan shapes, soft sponges fromSyria, isis coral from the Molucca Islands, sea-pen coral, wonderfulcoral of the genus Virgularia from the waters of Norway, various coralof the genus Umbellularia, alcyonarian coral, then a whole series ofthose madrepores that my mentor Professor Milne-Edwards has soshrewdly classified into divisions and among which I noted thewonderful genus Flabellina as well as the genus Oculina from RéunionIsland, plus a “Neptune’s chariot” from the Caribbean Sea—every superbvariety of coral, and in short, every species of these unusualpolyparies that congregate to form entire islands that will one dayturn into continents. Among the echinoderms, notable for being coveredwith spines: starfish, feather stars, sea lilies, free-swimmingcrinoids, brittle stars, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, etc., representeda complete collection of the individuals in this group.An excitable conchologist would surely have fainted dead away beforeother, more numerous glass cases in which were classified specimensfrom the mollusk branch. There I saw a collection of incalculablevalue that I haven’t time to describe completely. Among these exhibitsI’ll mention, just for the record: an elegant royal hammer shell fromthe Indian Ocean, whose evenly spaced white spots stood out sharplyagainst a base of red and brown; an imperial spiny oyster, brightlycolored, bristling with thorns, a specimen rare to European museums,whose value I estimated at 20,000 francs; a common hammer shell fromthe seas near Queensland, very hard to come by; exotic cockles fromSenegal, fragile white bivalve shells that a single breath could poplike a soap bubble; several varieties of watering-pot shell from Java,a sort of limestone tube fringed with leafy folds and much fought overby collectors; a whole series of top-shell snails—greenish yellow onesfished up from American seas, others colored reddish brown thatpatronize the waters off Queensland, the former coming from the Gulfof Mexico and notable for their overlapping shells, the latter somesun-carrier shells found in the southernmost seas, finally and rarestof all, the magnificent spurred-star shell from New Zealand; then somewonderful peppery-furrow shells; several valuable species of cytheraclams and venus clams; the trellis wentletrap snail from Tranquebar onIndia’s eastern shore; a marbled turban snail gleaming withmother-of-pearl; green parrot shells from the seas of China; thevirtually unknown cone snail from the genus Coenodullus; every varietyof cowry used as money in India and Africa; a “glory-of-the-seas,” themost valuable shell in the East Indies; finally, common periwinkles,delphinula snails, turret snails, violet snails, European cowries,volute snails, olive shells, miter shells, helmet shells, murexsnails, whelks, harp shells, spiky periwinkles, triton snails, hornshells, spindle shells, conch shells, spider conchs, limpets, glasssnails, sea butterflies—every kind of delicate, fragile seashell thatscience has baptized with its most delightful names.Aside and in special compartments, strings of supremely beautifulpearls were spread out, the electric light flecking them with littlefiery sparks: pink pearls pulled from saltwater fan shells in the RedSea; green pearls from the rainbow abalone; yellow, blue, and blackpearls, the unusual handiwork of various mollusks from every ocean andof certain mussels from rivers up north; in short, several specimensof incalculable worth that had been oozed by the rarest ofshellfish. Some of these pearls were bigger than a pigeon egg; theymore than equaled the one that the explorer Tavernier sold the Shah ofPersia for 3,000,000 francs, and they surpassed that other pearl ownedby the Imam of Muscat, which I had believed to be unrivaled in theentire world.Consequently, to calculate the value of this collection was, I shouldsay, impossible. Captain Nemo must have spent millions in acquiringthese different specimens, and I was wondering what financialresources he tapped to satisfy his collector’s fancies, when thesewords interrupted me:“You’re examining my shells, professor? They’re indeed able tofascinate a naturalist; but for me they have an added charm, sinceI’ve collected every one of them with my own two hands, and not a seaon the globe has escaped my investigations.”“I understand, captain, I understand your delight at strolling in themidst of this wealth. You’re a man who gathers his treasure inperson. No museum in Europe owns such a collection of exhibits fromthe ocean. But if I exhaust all my wonderment on them, I’ll havenothing left for the ship that carries them! I have absolutely no wishto probe those secrets of yours! But I confess that my curiosity isaroused to the limit by this Nautilus, the motor power it contains,the equipment enabling it to operate, the ultra powerful force thatbrings it to life. I see some instruments hanging on the walls of thislounge whose purposes are unknown to me. May I learn—”“Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo answered me, “I’ve said you’d befree aboard my vessel, so no part of the Nautilus is off-limits toyou. You may inspect it in detail, and I’ll be delighted to act asyour guide.”“I don’t know how to thank you, sir, but I won’t abuse your goodnature. I would only ask you about the uses intended for theseinstruments of physical measure—”“Professor, these same instruments are found in my stateroom, whereI’ll have the pleasure of explaining their functions to you. Butbeforehand, come inspect the cabin set aside for you. You need tolearn how you’ll be lodged aboard the Nautilus.”I followed Captain Nemo, who, via one of the doors cut into thelounge’s canted corners, led me back down the ship’s gangways. He tookme to the bow, and there I found not just a cabin but an elegantstateroom with a bed, a washstand, and various other furnishings.I could only thank my host.“Your stateroom adjoins mine,” he told me, opening a door, “and mineleads into that lounge we’ve just left.”I entered the captain’s stateroom. It had an austere, almost monasticappearance. An iron bedstead, a worktable, some washstandfixtures. Subdued lighting. No luxuries. Just the bare necessities.Captain Nemo showed me to a bench.“Kindly be seated,” he told me.I sat, and he began speaking as follows:CHAPTER 12Everything through Electricity“SIR,” CAPTAIN NEMO SAID, showing me the instruments hanging on thewalls of his stateroom, “these are the devices needed to navigate theNautilus. Here, as in the lounge, I always have them before my eyes,and they indicate my position and exact heading in the midst of theocean. You’re familiar with some of them, such as the thermometer,which gives the temperature inside the Nautilus; the barometer, whichmeasures the heaviness of the outside air and forecasts changes in theweather; the humidistat, which indicates the degree of dryness in theatmosphere; the storm glass, whose mixture decomposes to foretell thearrival of tempests; the compass, which steers my course; the sextant,which takes the sun’s altitude and tells me my latitude; chronometers,which allow me to calculate my longitude; and finally, spyglasses forboth day and night, enabling me to scrutinize every point of thehorizon once the Nautilus has risen to the surface of the waves.”“These are the normal navigational instruments,” I replied, “and I’mfamiliar with their uses. But no doubt these others answer pressingneeds unique to the Nautilus. That dial I see there, with the needlemoving across it—isn’t it a pressure gauge?”“It is indeed a pressure gauge. It’s placed in contact with the water,and it indicates the outside pressure on our hull, which in turn givesme the depth at which my submersible is sitting.”“And these are some new breed of sounding line?”“They’re thermometric sounding lines that report water temperatures inthe different strata.”“And these other instruments, whose functions I can’t even guess?”“Here, professor, I need to give you some background information,”Captain Nemo said. “So kindly hear me out.”He fell silent for some moments, then he said:“There’s a powerful, obedient, swift, and effortless force that can bebent to any use and which reigns supreme aboard my vessel. It doeseverything. It lights me, it warms me, it’s the soul of my mechanicalequipment. This force is electricity.”“Electricity!” I exclaimed in some surprise.“Yes, sir.”“But, captain, you have a tremendous speed of movement that doesn’tsquare with the strength of electricity. Until now, its dynamicpotential has remained quite limited, capable of producing only smallamounts of power!”“Professor,” Captain Nemo replied, “my electricity isn’t therun-of-the-mill variety, and with your permission, I’ll leave it atthat.”“I won’t insist, sir, and I’ll rest content with simply beingflabbergasted at your results. I would ask one question, however,which you needn’t answer if it’s indiscreet. The electric cells youuse to generate this marvelous force must be depleted veryquickly. Their zinc component, for example: how do you replace it,since you no longer stay in contact with the shore?”“That question deserves an answer,” Captain Nemo replied. “First off,I’ll mention that at the bottom of the sea there exist veins of zinc,iron, silver, and gold whose mining would quite certainly befeasible. But I’ve tapped none of these land-based metals, and Iwanted to make demands only on the sea itself for the sources of myelectricity.”“The sea itself?”“Yes, professor, and there was no shortage of such sources. In fact,by establishing a circuit between two wires immersed to differentdepths, I’d be able to obtain electricity through the divergingtemperatures they experience; but I preferred to use a more practicalprocedure.”“And that is?”“You’re familiar with the composition of salt water. In 1,000 gramsone finds 96.5% water and about 2.66% sodium chloride; then smallquantities of magnesium chloride, potassium chloride, magnesiumbromide, sulfate of magnesia, calcium sulfate, and calciumcarbonate. Hence you observe that sodium chloride is encountered therein significant proportions. Now then, it’s this sodium that I extractfrom salt water and with which I compose my electric cells.”“Sodium?”“Yes, sir. Mixed with mercury, it forms an amalgam that takes theplace of zinc in Bunsen cells. The mercury is never depleted. Only thesodium is consumed, and the sea itself gives me that. Beyond this,I’ll mention that sodium batteries have been found to generate thegreater energy, and their electro-motor strength is twice that of zincbatteries.”“Captain, I fully understand the excellence of sodium under theconditions in which you’re placed. The sea contains it. Fine. But itstill has to be produced, in short, extracted. And how do youaccomplish this? Obviously your batteries could do the extracting; butif I’m not mistaken, the consumption of sodium needed by your electricequipment would be greater than the quantity you’d extract. It wouldcome about, then, that in the process of producing your sodium, you’duse up more than you’d make!”“Accordingly, professor, I don’t extract it with batteries; quitesimply, I utilize the heat of coal from the earth.”“From the earth?” I said, my voice going up on the word.“We’ll say coal from the seafloor, if you prefer,” Captain Nemoreplied.“And you can mine these veins of underwater coal?”“You’ll watch me work them, Professor Aronnax. I ask only a littlepatience of you, since you’ll have ample time to be patient. Justremember one thing: I owe everything to the ocean; it generateselectricity, and electricity gives the Nautilus heat, light, motion,and, in a word, life itself.”“But not the air you breathe?”“Oh, I could produce the air needed on board, but it would bepointless, since I can rise to the surface of the sea whenever Ilike. However, even though electricity doesn’t supply me withbreathable air, it at least operates the powerful pumps that store itunder pressure in special tanks; which, if need be, allows me toextend my stay in the lower strata for as long as I want.”“Captain,” I replied, “I’ll rest content with marveling. You’veobviously found what all mankind will surely find one day, the truedynamic power of electricity.”“I’m not so certain they’ll find it,” Captain Nemo replied icily. “Butbe that as it may, you’re already familiar with the first use I’vefound for this valuable force. It lights us, and with a uniformity andcontinuity not even possessed by sunlight. Now, look at that clock:it’s electric, it runs with an accuracy rivaling the finestchronometers. I’ve had it divided into twenty-four hours like Italianclocks, since neither day nor night, sun nor moon, exist for me, butonly this artificial light that I import into the depths of the seas!See, right now it’s ten o’clock in the morning.”“That’s perfect.”“Another use for electricity: that dial hanging before our eyesindicates how fast the Nautilus is going. An electric wire puts it incontact with the patent log; this needle shows me the actual speed ofmy submersible. And . . . hold on . . . just now we’re proceeding atthe moderate pace of fifteen miles per hour.”“It’s marvelous,” I replied, “and I truly see, captain, how right youare to use this force; it’s sure to take the place of wind, water, andsteam.”“But that’s not all, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo said, standingup. “And if you’d care to follow me, we’ll inspect the Nautilus’sstern.”In essence, I was already familiar with the whole forward part of thisunderwater boat, and here are its exact subdivisions going fromamidships to its spur: the dining room, 5 meters long and separatedfrom the library by a watertight bulkhead, in other words, it couldn’tbe penetrated by the sea; the library, 5 meters long; the main lounge,10 meters long, separated from the captain’s stateroom by a secondwatertight bulkhead; the aforesaid stateroom, 5 meters long; mine, 2.5meters long; and finally, air tanks 7.5 meters long and extending tothe stempost. Total: a length of 35 meters. Doors were cut into thewatertight bulkheads and were shut hermetically by means ofindia-rubber seals, which insured complete safety aboard the Nautilusin the event of a leak in any one section.I followed Captain Nemo down gangways located for easy transit, and Iarrived amidships. There I found a sort of shaft heading upwardbetween two watertight bulkheads. An iron ladder, clamped to the wall,led to the shaft’s upper end. I asked the captain what this ladder wasfor.“It goes to the skiff,” he replied.“What! You have a skiff?” I replied in some astonishment.“Surely. An excellent longboat, light and unsinkable, which is usedfor excursions and fishing trips.”“But when you want to set out, don’t you have to return to the surfaceof the sea?”“By no means. The skiff is attached to the topside of the Nautilus’shull and is set in a cavity expressly designed to receive it. It’scompletely decked over, absolutely watertight, and held solidly inplace by bolts. This ladder leads to a manhole cut into the Nautilus’shull and corresponding to a comparable hole cut into the side of theskiff. I insert myself through this double opening into thelongboat. My crew close up the hole belonging to the Nautilus; I closeup the one belonging to the skiff, simply by screwing it into place. Iundo the bolts holding the skiff to the submersible, and the longboatrises with prodigious speed to the surface of the sea. I then open thedeck paneling, carefully closed until that point; I up mast and hoistsail—or I take out my oars—and I go for a spin.”“But how do you return to the ship?”“I don’t, Professor Aronnax; the Nautilus returns to me.”“At your command?”“At my command. An electric wire connects me to the ship. I fire off atelegram, and that’s that.”“Right,” I said, tipsy from all these wonders, “nothing to it!”After passing the well of the companionway that led to the platform, Isaw a cabin 2 meters long in which Conseil and Ned Land, enrapturedwith their meal, were busy devouring it to the last crumb. Then a dooropened into the galley, 3 meters long and located between the vessel’shuge storage lockers.There, even more powerful and obedient than gas, electricity did mostof the cooking. Arriving under the stoves, wires transmitted toplatinum griddles a heat that was distributed and sustained withperfect consistency. It also heated a distilling mechanism that, viaevaporation, supplied excellent drinking water. Next to this galleywas a bathroom, conveniently laid out, with faucets supplying hot orcold water at will.After the galley came the crew’s quarters, 5 meters long. But the doorwas closed and I couldn’t see its accommodations, which might havetold me the number of men it took to operate the Nautilus.At the far end stood a fourth watertight bulkhead, separating thecrew’s quarters from the engine room. A door opened, and I stood inthe compartment where Captain Nemo, indisputably a world-classengineer, had set up his locomotive equipment.Brightly lit, the engine room measured at least 20 meters inlength. It was divided, by function, into two parts: the firstcontained the cells for generating electricity, the second thatmechanism transmitting movement to the propeller.Right off, I detected an odor permeating the compartment that was suigeneris.* Captain Nemo noticed the negative impression it made on me.*Latin: “in a class by itself.” Ed.“That,” he told me, “is a gaseous discharge caused by our use ofsodium, but it’s only a mild inconvenience. In any event, everymorning we sanitize the ship by ventilating it in the open air.”Meanwhile I examined the Nautilus’s engine with a fascination easy toimagine.“You observe,” Captain Nemo told me, “that I use Bunsen cells, notRuhmkorff cells. The latter would be ineffectual. One uses fewerBunsen cells, but they’re big and strong, and experience has proventheir superiority. The electricity generated here makes its way to thestern, where electromagnets of huge size activate a special system oflevers and gears that transmit movement to the propeller’s shaft. Thelatter has a diameter of 6 meters, a pitch of 7.5 meters, and can doup to 120 revolutions per minute.”“And that gives you?”“A speed of fifty miles per hour.”There lay a mystery, but I didn’t insist on exploring it. How couldelectricity work with such power? Where did this nearly unlimitedenergy originate? Was it in the extraordinary voltage obtained fromsome new kind of induction coil? Could its transmission have beenimmeasurably increased by some unknown system of levers?** This wasthe point I couldn’t grasp.**Author’s Note: And sure enough, there’s now talk of such adiscovery, in which a new set of levers generates considerablepower. Did its inventor meet up with Captain Nemo?“Captain Nemo,” I said, “I’ll vouch for the results and not try toexplain them. I’ve seen the Nautilus at work out in front of theAbraham Lincoln, and I know where I stand on its speed. But it isn’tenough just to move, we have to see where we’re going! We must be ableto steer right or left, up or down! How do you reach the lower depths,where you meet an increasing resistance that’s assessed in hundreds ofatmospheres? How do you rise back to the surface of the ocean?Finally, how do you keep your ship at whatever level suits you? Am Iindiscreet in asking you all these things?”“Not at all, professor,” the captain answered me after a slighthesitation, “since you’ll never leave this underwater boat. Come intothe lounge. It’s actually our work room, and there you’ll learn thefull story about the Nautilus!”CHAPTER 13Some FiguresA MOMENT LATER we were seated on a couch in the lounge, cigars betweenour lips. The captain placed before my eyes a working drawing thatgave the ground plan, cross section, and side view of theNautilus. Then he began his description as follows:“Here, Professor Aronnax, are the different dimensions of this boatnow transporting you. It’s a very long cylinder with conical ends. Itnoticeably takes the shape of a cigar, a shape already adopted inLondon for several projects of the same kind. The length of thiscylinder from end to end is exactly seventy meters, and its maximumbreadth of beam is eight meters. So it isn’t quite built on theten-to-one ratio of your high-speed steamers; but its lines aresufficiently long, and their tapering gradual enough, so that thedisplaced water easily slips past and poses no obstacle to the ship’smovements.“These two dimensions allow you to obtain, via a simple calculation,the surface area and volume of the Nautilus. Its surface area totals1,011.45 square meters, its volume 1,507.2 cubic meters—which istantamount to saying that when it’s completely submerged, it displaces1,500 cubic meters of water, or weighs 1,500 metric tons.“In drawing up plans for a ship meant to navigate underwater, I wantedit, when floating on the waves, to lie nine-tenths below the surfaceand to emerge only one-tenth. Consequently, under these conditions itneeded to displace only nine-tenths of its volume, hence 1,356.48cubic meters; in other words, it was to weigh only that same number ofmetric tons. So I was obliged not to exceed this weight while buildingit to the aforesaid dimensions.“The Nautilus is made up of two hulls, one inside the other; betweenthem, joining them together, are iron T-bars that give this ship theutmost rigidity. In fact, thanks to this cellular arrangement, it hasthe resistance of a stone block, as if it were completely solid. Itsplating can’t give way; it’s self-adhering and not dependent on thetightness of its rivets; and due to the perfect union of itsmaterials, the solidarity of its construction allows it to defy themost violent seas.“The two hulls are manufactured from boilerplate steel, whose relativedensity is 7.8 times that of water. The first hull has a thickness ofno less than five centimeters and weighs 394.96 metric tons. My secondhull, the outer cover, includes a keel fifty centimeters high bytwenty-five wide, which by itself weighs 62 metric tons; this hull,the engine, the ballast, the various accessories and accommodations,plus the bulkheads and interior braces, have a combined weight of961.52 metric tons, which when added to 394.96 metric tons, gives usthe desired total of 1,356.48 metric tons. Clear?”“Clear,” I replied.“So,” the captain went on, “when the Nautilus lies on the waves underthese conditions, one-tenth of it does emerge above water. Now then,if I provide some ballast tanks equal in capacity to that one-tenth,hence able to hold 150.72 metric tons, and if I fill them with water,the boat then displaces 1,507.2 metric tons—or it weighs that much—andit would be completely submerged. That’s what comes about,professor. These ballast tanks exist within easy access in the lowerreaches of the Nautilus. I open some stopcocks, the tanks fill, theboat sinks, and it’s exactly flush with the surface of the water.”“Fine, captain, but now we come to a genuine difficulty. You’re ableto lie flush with the surface of the ocean, that I understand. Butlower down, while diving beneath that surface, isn’t your submersiblegoing to encounter a pressure, and consequently undergo an upwardthrust, that must be assessed at one atmosphere per every thirty feetof water, hence at about one kilogram per each square centimeter?”“Precisely, sir.”“Then unless you fill up the whole Nautilus, I don’t see how you canforce it down into the heart of these liquid masses.”“Professor,” Captain Nemo replied, “static objects mustn’t be confusedwith dynamic ones, or we’ll be open to serious error. Comparativelylittle effort is spent in reaching the ocean’s lower regions, becauseall objects have a tendency to become ‘sinkers.’ Follow my logichere.”“I’m all ears, captain.”“When I wanted to determine what increase in weight the Nautilusneeded to be given in order to submerge, I had only to take note ofthe proportionate reduction in volume that salt water experiences indeeper and deeper strata.”“That’s obvious,” I replied.“Now then, if water isn’t absolutely incompressible, at least itcompresses very little. In fact, according to the most recentcalculations, this reduction is only .0000436 per atmosphere, or perevery thirty feet of depth. For instance, to go 1,000 meters down, Imust take into account the reduction in volume that occurs under apressure equivalent to that from a 1,000-meter column of water, inother words, under a pressure of 100 atmospheres. In this instance thereduction would be .00436. Consequently, I’d have to increase myweight from 1,507.2 metric tons to 1,513.77. So the added weight wouldonly be 6.57 metric tons.”“That’s all?”“That’s all, Professor Aronnax, and the calculation is easy tocheck. Now then, I have supplementary ballast tanks capable ofshipping 100 metric tons of water. So I can descend to considerabledepths. When I want to rise again and lie flush with the surface, allI have to do is expel that water; and if I desire that the Nautilusemerge above the waves to one-tenth of its total capacity, I empty allthe ballast tanks completely.”This logic, backed up by figures, left me without a single objection.“I accept your calculations, captain,” I replied, “and I’d beill-mannered to dispute them, since your daily experience bears themout. But at this juncture, I have a hunch that we’re still left withone real difficulty.”“What’s that, sir?”“When you’re at a depth of 1,000 meters, the Nautilus’s plating bearsa pressure of 100 atmospheres. If at this point you want to empty thesupplementary ballast tanks in order to lighten your boat and rise tothe surface, your pumps must overcome that pressure of 100atmospheres, which is 100 kilograms per each square centimeter. Thisdemands a strength—”“That electricity alone can give me,” Captain Nemo said swiftly. “Sir,I repeat: the dynamic power of my engines is nearly infinite. TheNautilus’s pumps have prodigious strength, as you must have noticedwhen their waterspouts swept like a torrent over the AbrahamLincoln. Besides, I use my supplementary ballast tanks only to reachan average depth of 1,500 to 2,000 meters, and that with a view toconserving my machinery. Accordingly, when I have a mind to visit theocean depths two or three vertical leagues beneath the surface, I usemaneuvers that are more time-consuming but no less infallible.”“What are they, captain?” I asked.“Here I’m naturally led into telling you how the Nautilus ismaneuvered.”“I can’t wait to find out.”“In order to steer this boat to port or starboard, in short, to maketurns on a horizontal plane, I use an ordinary, wide-bladed rudderthat’s fastened to the rear of the sternpost and worked by a wheel andtackle. But I can also move the Nautilus upward and downward on avertical plane by the simple method of slanting its two fins, whichare attached to its sides at its center of flotation; these fins areflexible, able to assume any position, and can be operated from insideby means of powerful levers. If these fins stay parallel with theboat, the latter moves horizontally. If they slant, the Nautilusfollows the angle of that slant and, under its propeller’s thrust,either sinks on a diagonal as steep as it suits me, or rises on thatdiagonal. And similarly, if I want to return more swiftly to thesurface, I throw the propeller in gear, and the water’s pressure makesthe Nautilus rise vertically, as an air balloon inflated with hydrogenlifts swiftly into the skies.”“Bravo, captain!” I exclaimed. “But in the midst of the waters, howcan your helmsman follow the course you’ve given him?”“My helmsman is stationed behind the windows of a pilothouse, whichprotrudes from the topside of the Nautilus’s hull and is fitted withbiconvex glass.”“Is glass capable of resisting such pressures?”“Perfectly capable. Though fragile on impact, crystal can still offerconsiderable resistance. In 1864, during experiments on fishing byelectric light in the middle of the North Sea, glass panes less thanseven millimeters thick were seen to resist a pressure of sixteenatmospheres, all the while letting through strong, heat-generatingrays whose warmth was unevenly distributed. Now then, I use glasswindows measuring no less than twenty-one centimeters at theircenters; in other words, they’ve thirty times the thickness.”“Fair enough, captain, but if we’re going to see, we need light todrive away the dark, and in the midst of the murky waters, I wonderhow your helmsman can—”“Set astern of the pilothouse is a powerful electric reflector whoserays light up the sea for a distance of half a mile.”“Oh, bravo! Bravo three times over, captain! That explains thephosphorescent glow from this so-called narwhale that so puzzled usscientists! Pertinent to this, I’ll ask you if the Nautilus’s runningafoul of the Scotia, which caused such a great uproar, was the resultof an accidental encounter?”“Entirely accidental, sir. I was navigating two meters beneath thesurface of the water when the collision occurred. However, I could seethat it had no dire consequences.”“None, sir. But as for your encounter with the Abraham Lincoln. . . ?”“Professor, that troubled me, because it’s one of the best ships inthe gallant American navy, but they attacked me and I had to defendmyself! All the same, I was content simply to put the frigate in acondition where it could do me no harm; it won’t have any difficultygetting repairs at the nearest port.”“Ah, commander,” I exclaimed with conviction, “your Nautilus is trulya marvelous boat!”“Yes, professor,” Captain Nemo replied with genuine excitement, “and Ilove it as if it were my own flesh and blood! Aboard a conventionalship, facing the ocean’s perils, danger lurks everywhere; on thesurface of the sea, your chief sensation is the constant feeling of anunderlying chasm, as the Dutchman Jansen so aptly put it; but belowthe waves aboard the Nautilus, your heart never fails you! There areno structural deformities to worry about, because the double hull ofthis boat has the rigidity of iron; no rigging to be worn out byrolling and pitching on the waves; no sails for the wind to carry off;no boilers for steam to burst open; no fires to fear, because thissubmersible is made of sheet iron not wood; no coal to run out of,since electricity is its mechanical force; no collisions to fear,because it navigates the watery deep all by itself; no storms tobrave, because just a few meters beneath the waves, it finds absolutetranquility! There, sir. There’s the ideal ship! And if it’s true thatthe engineer has more confidence in a craft than the builder, and thebuilder more than the captain himself, you can understand the utterabandon with which I place my trust in this Nautilus, since I’m itscaptain, builder, and engineer all in one!”Captain Nemo spoke with winning eloquence. The fire in his eyes andthe passion in his gestures transfigured him. Yes, he loved his shipthe same way a father loves his child!But one question, perhaps indiscreet, naturally popped up, and Icouldn’t resist asking it.“You’re an engineer, then, Captain Nemo?”“Yes, professor,” he answered me. “I studied in London, Paris, and NewYork back in the days when I was a resident of the earth’scontinents.”“But how were you able to build this wonderful Nautilus in secret?”“Each part of it, Professor Aronnax, came from a different spot on theglobe and reached me at a cover address. Its keel was forged byCreusot in France, its propeller shaft by Pen & Co. in London, thesheet-iron plates for its hull by Laird’s in Liverpool, its propellerby Scott’s in Glasgow. Its tanks were manufactured by Cail & Co. inParis, its engine by Krupp in Prussia, its spur by the Motalaworkshops in Sweden, its precision instruments by Hart Bros. in NewYork, etc.; and each of these suppliers received my specificationsunder a different name.”“But,” I went on, “once these parts were manufactured, didn’t theyhave to be mounted and adjusted?”“Professor, I set up my workshops on a deserted islet inmidocean. There our Nautilus was completed by me and my workmen, inother words, by my gallant companions whom I’ve molded andeducated. Then, when the operation was over, we burned every trace ofour stay on that islet, which if I could have, I’d have blown up.”“From all this, may I assume that such a boat costs a fortune?”“An iron ship, Professor Aronnax, runs 1,125 francs per metricton. Now then, the Nautilus has a burden of 1,500 metrictons. Consequently, it cost 1,687,000 francs, hence 2,000,000 francsincluding its accommodations, and 4,000,000 or 5,000,000 with all thecollections and works of art it contains.”“One last question, Captain Nemo.”“Ask, professor.”“You’re rich, then?”“Infinitely rich, sir, and without any trouble, I could pay off theten-billion-franc French national debt!”I gaped at the bizarre individual who had just spoken these words. Washe playing on my credulity? Time would tell.CHAPTER 14The Black CurrentTHE PART OF THE planet earth that the seas occupy has been assessed at3,832,558 square myriameters, hence more than 38,000,000,000hectares. This liquid mass totals 2,250,000,000 cubic miles and couldform a sphere with a diameter of sixty leagues, whose weight would bethree quintillion metric tons. To appreciate such a number, we shouldremember that a quintillion is to a billion what a billion is to one,in other words, there are as many billions in a quintillion as ones ina billion! Now then, this liquid mass nearly equals the total amountof water that has poured through all the earth’s rivers for the past40,000 years!During prehistoric times, an era of fire was followed by an era ofwater. At first there was ocean everywhere. Then, during the Silurianperiod, the tops of mountains gradually appeared above the waves,islands emerged, disappeared beneath temporary floods, rose again,were fused to form continents, and finally the earth’s geographysettled into what we have today. Solid matter had wrested from liquidmatter some 37,657,000 square miles, hence 12,916,000,000 hectares.The outlines of the continents allow the seas to be divided into fivemajor parts: the frozen Arctic and Antarctic oceans, the Indian Ocean,the Atlantic Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean.The Pacific Ocean extends north to south between the two polar circlesand east to west between America and Asia over an expanse of 145degrees of longitude. It’s the most tranquil of the seas; its currentsare wide and slow-moving, its tides moderate, its rainfallabundant. And this was the ocean that I was first destined to crossunder these strangest of auspices.“If you don’t mind, professor,” Captain Nemo told me, “we’ll determineour exact position and fix the starting point of our voyage. It’sfifteen minutes before noon. I’m going to rise to the surface of thewater.”The captain pressed an electric bell three times. The pumps began toexpel water from the ballast tanks; on the pressure gauge, a needlemarked the decreasing pressures that indicated the Nautilus’s upwardprogress; then the needle stopped.“Here we are,” the captain said.I made my way to the central companionway, which led to theplatform. I climbed its metal steps, passed through the open hatches,and arrived topside on the Nautilus.The platform emerged only eighty centimeters above the waves. TheNautilus’s bow and stern boasted that spindle-shaped outline that hadcaused the ship to be compared appropriately to a long cigar. I notedthe slight overlap of its sheet-iron plates, which resembled thescales covering the bodies of our big land reptiles. So I had aperfectly natural explanation for why, despite the best spyglasses,this boat had always been mistaken for a marine animal.Near the middle of the platform, the skiff was half set in the ship’shull, making a slight bulge. Fore and aft stood two cupolas ofmoderate height, their sides slanting and partly inset with heavybiconvex glass, one reserved for the helmsman steering the Nautilus,the other for the brilliance of the powerful electric beacon lightinghis way.The sea was magnificent, the skies clear. This long aquatic vehiclecould barely feel the broad undulations of the ocean. A mild breezeout of the east rippled the surface of the water. Free of all mist,the horizon was ideal for taking sights.There was nothing to be seen. Not a reef, not an islet. No moreAbraham Lincoln. A deserted immenseness.Raising his sextant, Captain Nemo took the altitude of the sun, whichwould give him his latitude. He waited for a few minutes until the orbtouched the rim of the horizon. While he was taking his sights, hedidn’t move a muscle, and the instrument couldn’t have been steadierin hands made out of marble.“Noon,” he said. “Professor, whenever you’re ready. . . .”I took one last look at the sea, a little yellowish near the landingplaces of Japan, and I went below again to the main lounge.There the captain fixed his position and used a chronometer tocalculate his longitude, which he double-checked against his previousobservations of hour angles. Then he told me:“Professor Aronnax, we’re in longitude 137 degrees 15’ west—”“West of which meridian?” I asked quickly, hoping the captain’s replymight give me a clue to his nationality.“Sir,” he answered me, “I have chronometers variously set to themeridians of Paris, Greenwich, and Washington, D.C. But in your honor,I’ll use the one for Paris.”This reply told me nothing. I bowed, and the commander went on:“We’re in longitude 137 degrees 15’ west of the meridian of Paris, andlatitude 30 degrees 7’ north, in other words, about 300 miles from theshores of Japan. At noon on this day of November 8, we hereby beginour voyage of exploration under the waters.”“May God be with us!” I replied.“And now, professor,” the captain added, “I’ll leave you to yourintellectual pursuits. I’ve set our course east-northeast at a depthof fifty meters. Here are some large-scale charts on which you’ll beable to follow that course. The lounge is at your disposal, and withyour permission, I’ll take my leave.”Captain Nemo bowed. I was left to myself, lost in my thoughts. Theyall centered on the Nautilus’s commander. Would I ever learn thenationality of this eccentric man who had boasted of having none? Hissworn hate for humanity, a hate that perhaps was bent on some dreadfulrevenge—what had provoked it? Was he one of those unappreciatedscholars, one of those geniuses “embittered by the world,” as Conseilexpressed it, a latter-day Galileo, or maybe one of those men ofscience, like America’s Commander Maury, whose careers were ruined bypolitical revolutions? I couldn’t say yet. As for me, whom fate hadjust brought aboard his vessel, whose life he had held in the balance:he had received me coolly but hospitably. Only, he never took the handI extended to him. He never extended his own.For an entire hour I was deep in these musings, trying to probe thismystery that fascinated me so. Then my eyes focused on a huge worldmap displayed on the table, and I put my finger on the very spot whereour just-determined longitude and latitude intersected.Like the continents, the sea has its rivers. These are exclusivecurrents that can be identified by their temperature and color, themost remarkable being the one called the Gulf Stream. Science hasdefined the global paths of five chief currents: one in the northAtlantic, a second in the south Atlantic, a third in the northPacific, a fourth in the south Pacific, and a fifth in the southernIndian Ocean. Also it’s likely that a sixth current used to exist inthe northern Indian Ocean, when the Caspian and Aral Seas joined upwith certain large Asian lakes to form a single uniform expanse ofwater.Now then, at the spot indicated on the world map, one of theseseagoing rivers was rolling by, the Kuroshio of the Japanese, theBlack Current: heated by perpendicular rays from the tropical sun, itleaves the Bay of Bengal, crosses the Strait of Malacca, goes up theshores of Asia, and curves into the north Pacific as far as theAleutian Islands, carrying along trunks of camphor trees and otherlocal items, the pure indigo of its warm waters sharply contrastingwith the ocean’s waves. It was this current the Nautilus was about tocross. I watched it on the map with my eyes, I saw it lose itself inthe immenseness of the Pacific, and I felt myself swept along with it,when Ned Land and Conseil appeared in the lounge doorway.My two gallant companions stood petrified at the sight of the wonderson display.“Where are we?” the Canadian exclaimed. “In the Quebec Museum?”“Begging master’s pardon,” Conseil answered, “but this seems more likethe Sommerard artifacts exhibition!”“My friends,” I replied, signaling them to enter, “you’re in neitherCanada nor France, but securely aboard the Nautilus, fifty metersbelow sea level.”“If master says so, then so be it,” Conseil answered. “But in allhonesty, this lounge is enough to astonish even someone Flemish likemyself.”“Indulge your astonishment, my friend, and have a look, becausethere’s plenty of work here for a classifier of your talents.”Conseil needed no encouraging. Bending over the glass cases, thegallant lad was already muttering choice words from the naturalist’svocabulary: class Gastropoda, family Buccinoidea, genus cowry, speciesCypraea madagascariensis, etc.Meanwhile Ned Land, less dedicated to conchology, questioned me aboutmy interview with Captain Nemo. Had I discovered who he was, where hecame from, where he was heading, how deep he was taking us? In short,a thousand questions I had no time to answer.I told him everything I knew—or, rather, everything I didn’t know—andI asked him what he had seen or heard on his part.“Haven’t seen or heard a thing!” the Canadian replied. “I haven’t evenspotted the crew of this boat. By any chance, could they be electrictoo?”“Electric?”“Oh ye gods, I’m half tempted to believe it! But back to you,Professor Aronnax,” Ned Land said, still hanging on to hisideas. “Can’t you tell me how many men are on board? Ten, twenty,fifty, a hundred?”“I’m unable to answer you, Mr. Land. And trust me on this: for thetime being, get rid of these notions of taking over the Nautilus orescaping from it. This boat is a masterpiece of modern technology, andI’d be sorry to have missed it! Many people would welcome thecircumstances that have been handed us, just to walk in the midst ofthese wonders. So keep calm, and let’s see what’s happening aroundus.”“See!” the harpooner exclaimed. “There’s nothing to see, nothing we’llever see from this sheet-iron prison! We’re simply running aroundblindfolded—”Ned Land was just pronouncing these last words when we were suddenlyplunged into darkness, utter darkness. The ceiling lights went out soquickly, my eyes literally ached, just as if we had experienced theopposite sensation of going from the deepest gloom to the brightestsunlight.We stood stock-still, not knowing what surprise was waiting for us,whether pleasant or unpleasant. But a sliding sound becameaudible. You could tell that some panels were shifting over theNautilus’s sides.“It’s the beginning of the end!” Ned Land said.“. . . order Hydromedusa,” Conseil muttered.Suddenly, through two oblong openings, daylight appeared on both sidesof the lounge. The liquid masses came into view, brightly lit by theship’s electric outpourings. We were separated from the sea by twopanes of glass. Initially I shuddered at the thought that thesefragile partitions could break; but strong copper bands secured them,giving them nearly infinite resistance.The sea was clearly visible for a one-mile radius around theNautilus. What a sight! What pen could describe it? Who could portraythe effects of this light through these translucent sheets of water,the subtlety of its progressive shadings into the ocean’s upper andlower strata?The transparency of salt water has long been recognized. Its clarityis believed to exceed that of spring water. The mineral and organicsubstances it holds in suspension actually increase itstranslucency. In certain parts of the Caribbean Sea, you can see thesandy bottom with startling distinctness as deep as 145 meters down,and the penetrating power of the sun’s rays seems to give out only ata depth of 300 meters. But in this fluid setting traveled by theNautilus, our electric glow was being generated in the very heart ofthe waves. It was no longer illuminated water, it was liquid light.If we accept the hypotheses of the microbiologist Ehrenberg—whobelieves that these underwater depths are lit up by phosphorescentorganisms—nature has certainly saved one of her most prodigious sightsfor residents of the sea, and I could judge for myself from thethousandfold play of the light. On both sides I had windows openingover these unexplored depths. The darkness in the lounge enhanced thebrightness outside, and we stared as if this clear glass were thewindow of an immense aquarium.The Nautilus seemed to be standing still. This was due to the lack oflandmarks. But streaks of water, parted by the ship’s spur, sometimesthreaded before our eyes with extraordinary speed.In wonderment, we leaned on our elbows before these show windows, andour stunned silence remained unbroken until Conseil said:“You wanted to see something, Ned my friend; well, now you havesomething to see!”“How unusual!” the Canadian put in, setting aside his tantrums andgetaway schemes while submitting to this irresistible allure. “A manwould go an even greater distance just to stare at such a sight!”“Ah!” I exclaimed. “I see our captain’s way of life! He’s foundhimself a separate world that saves its most astonishing wonders justfor him!”“But where are the fish?” the Canadian ventured to observe. “I don’tsee any fish!”“Why would you care, Ned my friend?” Conseil replied. “Since you haveno knowledge of them.”“Me? A fisherman!” Ned Land exclaimed.And on this subject a dispute arose between the two friends, sinceboth were knowledgeable about fish, but from totally differentstandpoints.Everyone knows that fish make up the fourth and last class in thevertebrate branch. They have been quite aptly defined as:“cold-blooded vertebrates with a double circulatory system, breathingthrough gills, and designed to live in water.” They consist of twodistinct series: the series of bony fish, in other words, those whosespines have vertebrae made of bone; and cartilaginous fish, in otherwords, those whose spines have vertebrae made of cartilage.Possibly the Canadian was familiar with this distinction, but Conseilknew far more about it; and since he and Ned were now fast friends, hejust had to show off. So he told the harpooner:“Ned my friend, you’re a slayer of fish, a highly skilledfisherman. You’ve caught a large number of these fascinatinganimals. But I’ll bet you don’t know how they’re classified.”“Sure I do,” the harpooner replied in all seriousness. “They’reclassified into fish we eat and fish we don’t eat!”“Spoken like a true glutton,” Conseil replied. “But tell me, are youfamiliar with the differences between bony fish and cartilaginousfish?”“Just maybe, Conseil.”“And how about the subdivisions of these two large classes?”“I haven’t the foggiest notion,” the Canadian replied.“All right, listen and learn, Ned my friend! Bony fish are subdividedinto six orders. Primo, the acanthopterygians, whose upper jaw isfully formed and free-moving, and whose gills take the shape of acomb. This order consists of fifteen families, in other words,three-quarters of all known fish. Example: the common perch.”“Pretty fair eating,” Ned Land replied.“Secundo,” Conseil went on, “the abdominals, whose pelvic fins hangunder the abdomen to the rear of the pectorals but aren’t attached tothe shoulder bone, an order that’s divided into five families andmakes up the great majority of freshwater fish. Examples: carp, pike.”“Ugh!” the Canadian put in with distinct scorn. “You can keep thefreshwater fish!”“Tertio,” Conseil said, “the subbrachians, whose pelvic fins areattached under the pectorals and hang directly from the shoulderbone. This order contains four families. Examples: flatfish such assole, turbot, dab, plaice, brill, etc.”“Excellent, really excellent!” the harpooner exclaimed, interested infish only from an edible viewpoint.“Quarto,” Conseil went on, unabashed, “the apods, with long bodiesthat lack pelvic fins and are covered by a heavy, often glutinousskin, an order consisting of only one family. Examples: common eelsand electric eels.”“So-so, just so-so!” Ned Land replied.“Quinto,” Conseil said, “the lophobranchians, which have fully formed,free-moving jaws but whose gills consist of little tufts arranged inpairs along their gill arches. This order includes only onefamily. Examples: seahorses and dragonfish.”“Bad, very bad!” the harpooner replied.“Sexto and last,” Conseil said, “the plectognaths, whose maxillarybone is firmly attached to the side of the intermaxillary that formsthe jaw, and whose palate arch is locked to the skull by sutures thatrender the jaw immovable, an order lacking true pelvic fins and whichconsists of two families. Examples: puffers and moonfish.”“They’re an insult to a frying pan!” the Canadian exclaimed.“Are you grasping all this, Ned my friend?” asked the scholarlyConseil.“Not a lick of it, Conseil my friend,” the harpooner replied. “Butkeep going, because you fill me with fascination.”“As for cartilaginous fish,” Conseil went on unflappably, “theyconsist of only three orders.”“Good news,” Ned put in.“Primo, the cyclostomes, whose jaws are fused into a flexible ring andwhose gill openings are simply a large number of holes, an orderconsisting of only one family. Example: the lamprey.”“An acquired taste,” Ned Land replied.“Secundo, the selacians, with gills resembling those of thecyclostomes but whose lower jaw is free-moving. This order, which isthe most important in the class, consists of two families. Examples:the ray and the shark.”“What!” Ned Land exclaimed. “Rays and man-eaters in the same order?Well, Conseil my friend, on behalf of the rays, I wouldn’t advise youto put them in the same fish tank!”“Tertio,” Conseil replied, “The sturionians, whose gill opening is theusual single slit adorned with a gill cover, an order consisting offour genera. Example: the sturgeon.”“Ah, Conseil my friend, you saved the best for last, in my opinionanyhow! And that’s all of ’em?”“Yes, my gallant Ned,” Conseil replied. “And note well, even when onehas grasped all this, one still knows next to nothing, because thesefamilies are subdivided into genera, subgenera, species, varieties—”“All right, Conseil my friend,” the harpooner said, leaning toward theglass panel, “here come a couple of your varieties now!”“Yes! Fish!” Conseil exclaimed. “One would think he was in front of anaquarium!”“No,” I replied, “because an aquarium is nothing more than a cage, andthese fish are as free as birds in the air!”“Well, Conseil my friend, identify them! Start naming them!” Ned Landexclaimed.“Me?” Conseil replied. “I’m unable to! That’s my employer’sbailiwick!”And in truth, although the fine lad was a classifying maniac, he wasno naturalist, and I doubt that he could tell a bonito from a tuna. Inshort, he was the exact opposite of the Canadian, who knew nothingabout classification but could instantly put a name to any fish.“A triggerfish,” I said.“It’s a Chinese triggerfish,” Ned Land replied.“Genus Balistes, family Scleroderma, order Plectognatha,” Conseilmuttered.Assuredly, Ned and Conseil in combination added up to one outstandingnaturalist.The Canadian was not mistaken. Cavorting around the Nautilus was aschool of triggerfish with flat bodies, grainy skins, armed withstings on their dorsal fins, and with four prickly rows of quillsquivering on both sides of their tails. Nothing could have been morewonderful than the skin covering them: white underneath, gray above,with spots of gold sparkling in the dark eddies of the waves. Aroundthem, rays were undulating like sheets flapping in the wind, and amongthese I spotted, much to my glee, a Chinese ray, yellowish on itstopside, a dainty pink on its belly, and armed with three stingsbehind its eyes; a rare species whose very existence was still doubtedin Lacépède’s day, since that pioneering classifier of fish had seenone only in a portfolio of Japanese drawings.For two hours a whole aquatic army escorted the Nautilus. In the midstof their leaping and cavorting, while they competed with each other inbeauty, radiance, and speed, I could distinguish some green wrasse,bewhiskered mullet marked with pairs of black lines, white gobies fromthe genus Eleotris with curved caudal fins and violet spots on theback, wonderful Japanese mackerel from the genus Scomber with bluebodies and silver heads, glittering azure goldfish whose name byitself gives their full description, several varieties of porgy orgilthead (some banded gilthead with fins variously blue and yellow,some with horizontal heraldic bars and enhanced by a black striparound their caudal area, some with color zones and elegantly corsetedin their six waistbands), trumpetfish with flutelike beaks that lookedlike genuine seafaring woodcocks and were sometimes a meter long,Japanese salamanders, serpentine moray eels from the genus Echidnathat were six feet long with sharp little eyes and a huge mouthbristling with teeth; etc.Our wonderment stayed at an all-time fever pitch. Our exclamationswere endless. Ned identified the fish, Conseil classified them, and asfor me, I was in ecstasy over the verve of their movements and thebeauty of their forms. Never before had I been given the chance toglimpse these animals alive and at large in their native element.Given such a complete collection from the seas of Japan and China, Iwon’t mention every variety that passed before our dazzled eyes. Morenumerous than birds in the air, these fish raced right up to us, nodoubt attracted by the brilliant glow of our electric beacon.Suddenly daylight appeared in the lounge. The sheet-iron panels slidshut. The magical vision disappeared. But for a good while I keptdreaming away, until the moment my eyes focused on the instrumentshanging on the wall. The compass still showed our heading aseast-northeast, the pressure gauge indicated a pressure of fiveatmospheres (corresponding to a depth of fifty meters), and theelectric log gave our speed as fifteen miles per hour.I waited for Captain Nemo. But he didn’t appear. The clock marked thehour of five.Ned Land and Conseil returned to their cabin. As for me, I repaired tomy stateroom. There I found dinner ready for me. It consisted ofturtle soup made from the daintiest hawksbill, a red mullet withwhite, slightly flaky flesh, whose liver, when separately prepared,makes delicious eating, plus loin of imperial angelfish, whose flavorstruck me as even better than salmon.I spent the evening in reading, writing, and thinking. Then drowsinessovertook me, I stretched out on my eelgrass mattress, and I fell intoa deep slumber, while the Nautilus glided through the swiftly flowingBlack Current.CHAPTER 15An Invitation in WritingTHE NEXT DAY, November 9, I woke up only after a long, twelve-hourslumber. Conseil, a creature of habit, came to ask “how master’s nightwent,” and to offer his services. He had left his Canadian friendsleeping like a man who had never done anything else.I let the gallant lad babble as he pleased, without giving him much inthe way of a reply. I was concerned about Captain Nemo’s absenceduring our session the previous afternoon, and I hoped to see himagain today.Soon I had put on my clothes, which were woven from strands ofseashell tissue. More than once their composition provoked commentsfrom Conseil. I informed him that they were made from the smooth,silken filaments with which the fan mussel, a type of seashell quiteabundant along Mediterranean beaches, attaches itself to rocks. Inolden times, fine fabrics, stockings, and gloves were made from suchfilaments, because they were both very soft and very warm. So theNautilus’s crew could dress themselves at little cost, without needinga thing from cotton growers, sheep, or silkworms on shore.As soon as I was dressed, I made my way to the main lounge. It wasdeserted.I dove into studying the conchological treasures amassed inside theglass cases. I also investigated the huge plant albums that werefilled with the rarest marine herbs, which, although they were pressedand dried, still kept their wonderful colors. Among these valuablewater plants, I noted various seaweed: some Cladostephusverticillatus, peacock’s tails, fig-leafed caulerpa, grain-bearingbeauty bushes, delicate rosetangle tinted scarlet, sea colanderarranged into fan shapes, mermaid’s cups that looked like the caps ofsquat mushrooms and for years had been classified among the zoophytes;in short, a complete series of algae.The entire day passed without my being honored by a visit from CaptainNemo. The panels in the lounge didn’t open. Perhaps they didn’t wantus to get tired of these beautiful things.The Nautilus kept to an east-northeasterly heading, a speed of twelvemiles per hour, and a depth between fifty and sixty meters.Next day, November 10: the same neglect, the same solitude. I didn’tsee a soul from the crew. Ned and Conseil spent the better part of theday with me. They were astonished at the captain’s inexplicableabsence. Was this eccentric man ill? Did he want to change his plansconcerning us?But after all, as Conseil noted, we enjoyed complete freedom, we weredaintily and abundantly fed. Our host had kept to the terms of hisagreement. We couldn’t complain, and moreover the very uniqueness ofour situation had such generous rewards in store for us, we had nogrounds for criticism.That day I started my diary of these adventures, which has enabled meto narrate them with the most scrupulous accuracy; and one odd detail:I wrote it on paper manufactured from marine eelgrass.Early in the morning on November 11, fresh air poured through theNautilus’s interior, informing me that we had returned to the surfaceof the ocean to renew our oxygen supply. I headed for the centralcompanionway and climbed onto the platform.It was six o’clock. I found the weather overcast, the sea gray butcalm. Hardly a billow. I hoped to encounter Captain Nemo there—wouldhe come? I saw only the helmsman imprisoned in his glass-windowedpilothouse. Seated on the ledge furnished by the hull of the skiff, Iinhaled the sea’s salty aroma with great pleasure.Little by little, the mists were dispersed under the action of thesun’s rays. The radiant orb cleared the eastern horizon. Under itsgaze, the sea caught on fire like a trail of gunpowder. Scattered onhigh, the clouds were colored in bright, wonderfully shaded hues, andnumerous “ladyfingers” warned of daylong winds.**Author’s Note: “Ladyfingers” are small, thin, white clouds withragged edges.But what were mere winds to this Nautilus, which no storms couldintimidate!So I was marveling at this delightful sunrise, so life-giving andcheerful, when I heard someone climbing onto the platform.I was prepared to greet Captain Nemo, but it was his chief officer whoappeared—whom I had already met during our first visit with thecaptain. He advanced over the platform, not seeming to notice mypresence. A powerful spyglass to his eye, he scrutinized every pointof the horizon with the utmost care. Then, his examination over, heapproached the hatch and pronounced a phrase whose exact wordingfollows below. I remember it because, every morning, it was repeatedunder the same circumstances. It ran like this:“Nautron respoc lorni virch.”What it meant I was unable to say.These words pronounced, the chief officer went below again. I thoughtthe Nautilus was about to resume its underwater navigating. So I wentdown the hatch and back through the gangways to my stateroom.Five days passed in this way with no change in our situation. Everymorning I climbed onto the platform. The same phrase was pronounced bythe same individual. Captain Nemo did not appear.I was pursuing the policy that we had seen the last of him, when onNovember 16, while reentering my stateroom with Ned and Conseil, Ifound a note addressed to me on the table.I opened it impatiently. It was written in a script that was clear andneat but a bit “Old English” in style, its characters reminding me ofGerman calligraphy.The note was worded as follows:Professor AronnaxAboard the NautilusNovember 16, 1867Captain Nemo invites Professor Aronnax on a hunting trip that willtake place tomorrow morning in his Crespo Island forests. He hopesnothing will prevent the professor from attending, and he looksforward with pleasure to the professor’s companions joining him.CAPTAIN NEMO,Commander of the Nautilus.“A hunting trip!” Ned exclaimed.“And in his forests on Crespo Island!” Conseil added.“But does this mean the old boy goes ashore?” Ned Land went on.“That seems to be the gist of it,” I said, rereading the letter.“Well, we’ve got to accept!” the Canadian answered. “Once we’re onsolid ground, we’ll figure out a course of action. Besides, itwouldn’t pain me to eat a couple slices of fresh venison!”Without trying to reconcile the contradictions between Captain Nemo’sprofessed horror of continents or islands and his invitation to gohunting in a forest, I was content to reply:“First let’s look into this Crespo Island.”I consulted the world map; and in latitude 32 degrees 40’ north andlongitude 167 degrees 50’ west, I found an islet that had beendiscovered in 1801 by Captain Crespo, which old Spanish charts calledRocca de la Plata, in other words, “Silver Rock.” So we were about1,800 miles from our starting point, and by a slight change ofheading, the Nautilus was bringing us back toward the southeast.I showed my companions this small, stray rock in the middle of thenorth Pacific.“If Captain Nemo does sometimes go ashore,” I told them, “at least heonly picks desert islands!”Ned Land shook his head without replying; then he and Conseil leftme. After supper was served me by the mute and emotionless steward, Ifell asleep; but not without some anxieties.When I woke up the next day, November 17, I sensed that the Nautiluswas completely motionless. I dressed hurriedly and entered the mainlounge.Captain Nemo was there waiting for me. He stood up, bowed, and askedif it suited me to come along.Since he made no allusion to his absence the past eight days, I alsorefrained from mentioning it, and I simply answered that my companionsand I were ready to go with him.“Only, sir,” I added, “I’ll take the liberty of addressing a questionto you.”“Address away, Professor Aronnax, and if I’m able to answer, I will.”“Well then, captain, how is it that you’ve severed all ties with theshore, yet you own forests on Crespo Island?”“Professor,” the captain answered me, “these forests of mine don’tbask in the heat and light of the sun. They aren’t frequented bylions, tigers, panthers, or other quadrupeds. They’re known only tome. They grow only for me. These forests aren’t on land, they’reactual underwater forests.”“Underwater forests!” I exclaimed.“Yes, professor.”“And you’re offering to take me to them?”“Precisely.”“On foot?”“Without getting your feet wet.”“While hunting?”“While hunting.”“Rifles in hand?”“Rifles in hand.”I stared at the Nautilus’s commander with an air anything butflattering to the man.“Assuredly,” I said to myself, “he’s contracted some mentalillness. He’s had a fit that’s lasted eight days and isn’t over evenyet. What a shame! I liked him better eccentric than insane!”These thoughts were clearly readable on my face; but Captain Nemoremained content with inviting me to follow him, and I did so like aman resigned to the worst.We arrived at the dining room, where we found breakfast served.“Professor Aronnax,” the captain told me, “I beg you to share mybreakfast without formality. We can chat while we eat. Because,although I promised you a stroll in my forests, I made no pledge toarrange for your encountering a restaurant there. Accordingly, eatyour breakfast like a man who’ll probably eat dinner only when it’sextremely late.”I did justice to this meal. It was made up of various fish and someslices of sea cucumber, that praiseworthy zoophyte, all garnished withsuch highly appetizing seaweed as the Porphyra laciniata and theLaurencia primafetida. Our beverage consisted of clear water to which,following the captain’s example, I added some drops of a fermentedliquor extracted by the Kamchatka process from the seaweed known byname as Rhodymenia palmata.At first Captain Nemo ate without pronouncing a single word. Then hetold me:“Professor, when I proposed that you go hunting in my Crespo forests,you thought I was contradicting myself. When I informed you that itwas an issue of underwater forests, you thought I’d goneinsane. Professor, you must never make snap judgments about yourfellow man.”“But, captain, believe me—”“Kindly listen to me, and you’ll see if you have grounds for accusingme of insanity or self-contradiction.”“I’m all attention.”“Professor, you know as well as I do that a man can live underwater solong as he carries with him his own supply of breathable air. Forunderwater work projects, the workman wears a waterproof suit with hishead imprisoned in a metal capsule, while he receives air from aboveby means of force pumps and flow regulators.”“That’s the standard equipment for a diving suit,” I said.“Correct, but under such conditions the man has no freedom. He’sattached to a pump that sends him air through an india-rubber hose;it’s an actual chain that fetters him to the shore, and if we were tobe bound in this way to the Nautilus, we couldn’t go far either.”“Then how do you break free?” I asked.“We use the Rouquayrol-Denayrouze device, invented by two of yourfellow countrymen but refined by me for my own special uses, therebyenabling you to risk these new physiological conditions withoutsuffering any organic disorders. It consists of a tank built fromheavy sheet iron in which I store air under a pressure of fiftyatmospheres. This tank is fastened to the back by means of straps,like a soldier’s knapsack. Its top part forms a box where the air isregulated by a bellows mechanism and can be released only at itsproper tension. In the Rouquayrol device that has been in general use,two india-rubber hoses leave this box and feed to a kind of tent thatimprisons the operator’s nose and mouth; one hose is for the entranceof air to be inhaled, the other for the exit of air to be exhaled, andthe tongue closes off the former or the latter depending on thebreather’s needs. But in my case, since I face considerable pressuresat the bottom of the sea, I needed to enclose my head in a coppersphere, like those found on standard diving suits, and the two hosesfor inhalation and exhalation now feed to that sphere.”“That’s perfect, Captain Nemo, but the air you carry must be quicklydepleted; and once it contains no more than 15% oxygen, it becomesunfit for breathing.”“Surely, but as I told you, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus’s pumpsenable me to store air under considerable pressure, and given thiscircumstance, the tank on my diving equipment can supply breathableair for nine or ten hours.”“I’ve no more objections to raise,” I replied. “I’ll only ask you,captain: how can you light your way at the bottom of the ocean?”“With the Ruhmkorff device, Professor Aronnax. If the first is carriedon the back, the second is fastened to the belt. It consists of aBunsen battery that I activate not with potassium dichromate but withsodium. An induction coil gathers the electricity generated anddirects it to a specially designed lantern. In this lantern one findsa glass spiral that contains only a residue of carbon dioxidegas. When the device is operating, this gas becomes luminous and givesoff a continuous whitish light. Thus provided for, I breathe and Isee.”“Captain Nemo, to my every objection you give such crushing answers,I’m afraid to entertain a single doubt. However, though I have nochoice but to accept both the Rouquayrol and Ruhmkorff devices, I’dlike to register some reservations about the rifle with which you’llequip me.”“But it isn’t a rifle that uses gunpowder,” the captain replied.“Then it’s an air gun?”“Surely. How can I make gunpowder on my ship when I have no saltpeter,sulfur, or charcoal?”“Even so,” I replied, “to fire underwater in a medium that’s 855 timesdenser than air, you’d have to overcome considerable resistance.”“That doesn’t necessarily follow. There are certain Fulton-style gunsperfected by the Englishmen Philippe-Coles and Burley, the FrenchmanFurcy, and the Italian Landi; they’re equipped with a special systemof airtight fastenings and can fire in underwater conditions. But Irepeat: having no gunpowder, I’ve replaced it with air at highpressure, which is abundantly supplied me by the Nautilus’s pumps.”“But this air must be swiftly depleted.”“Well, in a pinch can’t my Rouquayrol tank supply me with more? All Ihave to do is draw it from an ad hoc spigot.* Besides, ProfessorAronnax, you’ll see for yourself that during these underwater huntingtrips, we make no great expenditure of either air or bullets.”*Latin: a spigot “just for that purpose.” Ed.“But it seems to me that in this semidarkness, amid this liquid that’sso dense in comparison to the atmosphere, a gunshot couldn’t carry farand would prove fatal only with difficulty!”“On the contrary, sir, with this rifle every shot is fatal; and assoon as the animal is hit, no matter how lightly, it falls as ifstruck by lightning.”“Why?”“Because this rifle doesn’t shoot ordinary bullets but little glasscapsules invented by the Austrian chemist Leniebroek, and I have aconsiderable supply of them. These glass capsules are covered with astrip of steel and weighted with a lead base; they’re genuine littleLeyden jars charged with high-voltage electricity. They go off at theslightest impact, and the animal, no matter how strong, drops dead. Imight add that these capsules are no bigger than number 4 shot, andthe chamber of any ordinary rifle could hold ten of them.”“I’ll quit debating,” I replied, getting up from the table. “And allthat’s left is for me to shoulder my rifle. So where you go, I’ll go.”Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus’s stern, and passing by Ned andConseil’s cabin, I summoned my two companions, who instantly followedus.Then we arrived at a cell located within easy access of the engineroom; in this cell we were to get dressed for our stroll.CHAPTER 16Strolling the PlainsTHIS CELL, properly speaking, was the Nautilus’s arsenal andwardrobe. Hanging from its walls, a dozen diving outfits were waitingfor anybody who wanted to take a stroll.After seeing these, Ned Land exhibited an obvious distaste for theidea of putting one on.“But my gallant Ned,” I told him, “the forests of Crespo Island aresimply underwater forests!”“Oh great!” put in the disappointed harpooner, watching his dreams offresh meat fade away. “And you, Professor Aronnax, are you going tostick yourself inside these clothes?”“It has to be, Mr. Ned.”“Have it your way, sir,” the harpooner replied, shrugging hisshoulders. “But speaking for myself, I’ll never get into those thingsunless they force me!”“No one will force you, Mr. Land,” Captain Nemo said.“And is Conseil going to risk it?” Ned asked.“Where master goes, I go,” Conseil replied.At the captain’s summons, two crewmen came to help us put on theseheavy, waterproof clothes, made from seamless India rubber andexpressly designed to bear considerable pressures. They were likesuits of armor that were both yielding and resistant, you mightsay. These clothes consisted of jacket and pants. The pants ended inbulky footwear adorned with heavy lead soles. The fabric of the jacketwas reinforced with copper mail that shielded the chest, protected itfrom the water’s pressure, and allowed the lungs to function freely;the sleeves ended in supple gloves that didn’t impede hand movements.These perfected diving suits, it was easy to see, were a far cry fromsuch misshapen costumes as the cork breastplates, leather jumpers,seagoing tunics, barrel helmets, etc., invented and acclaimed in the18th century.Conseil and I were soon dressed in these diving suits, as were CaptainNemo and one of his companions—a herculean type who must have beenprodigiously strong. All that remained was to encase one’s head in itsmetal sphere. But before proceeding with this operation, I asked thecaptain for permission to examine the rifles set aside for us.One of the Nautilus’s men presented me with a streamlined rifle whosebutt was boilerplate steel, hollow inside, and of fairly largedimensions. This served as a tank for the compressed air, which atrigger-operated valve could release into the metal chamber. In agroove where the butt was heaviest, a cartridge clip held some twentyelectric bullets that, by means of a spring, automatically took theirplaces in the barrel of the rifle. As soon as one shot had been fired,another was ready to go off.“Captain Nemo,” I said, “this is an ideal, easy-to-use weapon. I askonly to put it to the test. But how will we reach the bottom of thesea?”“Right now, professor, the Nautilus is aground in ten meters of water,and we’ve only to depart.”“But how will we set out?”“You’ll see.”Captain Nemo inserted his cranium into its spherical headgear. Conseiland I did the same, but not without hearing the Canadian toss us asarcastic “happy hunting.” On top, the suit ended in a collar ofthreaded copper onto which the metal helmet was screwed. Three holes,protected by heavy glass, allowed us to see in any direction withsimply a turn of the head inside the sphere. Placed on our backs, theRouquayrol device went into operation as soon as it was in position,and for my part, I could breathe with ease.The Ruhmkorff lamp hanging from my belt, my rifle in hand, I was readyto go forth. But in all honesty, while imprisoned in these heavyclothes and nailed to the deck by my lead soles, it was impossible forme to take a single step.But this circumstance had been foreseen, because I felt myselfpropelled into a little room adjoining the wardrobe. Towed in the sameway, my companions went with me. I heard a door with watertight sealsclose after us, and we were surrounded by profound darkness.After some minutes a sharp hissing reached my ears. I felt a distinctsensation of cold rising from my feet to my chest. Apparently astopcock inside the boat was letting in water from outside, whichoverran us and soon filled up the room. Contrived in the Nautilus’sside, a second door then opened. We were lit by a subdued light. Aninstant later our feet were treading the bottom of the sea.And now, how can I convey the impressions left on me by this strollunder the waters. Words are powerless to describe such wonders! Wheneven the painter’s brush can’t depict the effects unique to the liquidelement, how can the writer’s pen hope to reproduce them?Captain Nemo walked in front, and his companion followed us a fewsteps to the rear. Conseil and I stayed next to each other, as ifdaydreaming that through our metal carapaces, a little politeconversation might still be possible! Already I no longer felt thebulkiness of my clothes, footwear, and air tank, nor the weight of theheavy sphere inside which my head was rattling like an almond in itsshell. Once immersed in water, all these objects lost a part of theirweight equal to the weight of the liquid they displaced, and thanks tothis law of physics discovered by Archimedes, I did just fine. I wasno longer an inert mass, and I had, comparatively speaking, greatfreedom of movement.Lighting up the seafloor even thirty feet beneath the surface of theocean, the sun astonished me with its power. The solar rays easilycrossed this aqueous mass and dispersed its dark colors. I couldeasily distinguish objects 100 meters away. Farther on, the bottom wastinted with fine shades of ultramarine; then, off in the distance, itturned blue and faded in the midst of a hazy darkness. Truly, thiswater surrounding me was just a kind of air, denser than theatmosphere on land but almost as transparent. Above me I could see thecalm surface of the ocean.We were walking on sand that was fine-grained and smooth, not wrinkledlike beach sand, which preserves the impressions left by thewaves. This dazzling carpet was a real mirror, throwing back the sun’srays with startling intensity. The outcome: an immense vista ofreflections that penetrated every liquid molecule. Will anyone believeme if I assert that at this thirty-foot depth, I could see as if itwas broad daylight?For a quarter of an hour, I trod this blazing sand, which was strewnwith tiny crumbs of seashell. Looming like a long reef, the Nautilus’shull disappeared little by little, but when night fell in the midst ofthe waters, the ship’s beacon would surely facilitate our return onboard, since its rays carried with perfect distinctness. This effectis difficult to understand for anyone who has never seen light beamsso sharply defined on shore. There the dust that saturates the airgives such rays the appearance of a luminous fog; but above water aswell as underwater, shafts of electric light are transmitted withincomparable clarity.Meanwhile we went ever onward, and these vast plains of sand seemedendless. My hands parted liquid curtains that closed again behind me,and my footprints faded swiftly under the water’s pressure.Soon, scarcely blurred by their distance from us, the forms of someobjects took shape before my eyes. I recognized the lower slopes ofsome magnificent rocks carpeted by the finest zoophyte specimens, andright off, I was struck by an effect unique to this medium.By then it was ten o’clock in the morning. The sun’s rays hit thesurface of the waves at a fairly oblique angle, decomposing byrefraction as though passing through a prism; and when this light camein contact with flowers, rocks, buds, seashells, and polyps, the edgesof these objects were shaded with all seven hues of the solarspectrum. This riot of rainbow tints was a wonder, a feast for theeyes: a genuine kaleidoscope of red, green, yellow, orange, violet,indigo, and blue; in short, the whole palette of a color-happypainter! If only I had been able to share with Conseil the intensesensations rising in my brain, competing with him in exclamations ofwonderment! If only I had known, like Captain Nemo and his companion,how to exchange thoughts by means of prearranged signals! So, for lackof anything better, I talked to myself: I declaimed inside this copperbox that topped my head, spending more air on empty words than wasperhaps advisable.Conseil, like me, had stopped before this splendid sight. Obviously,in the presence of these zoophyte and mollusk specimens, the fine ladwas classifying his head off. Polyps and echinoderms abounded on theseafloor: various isis coral, cornularian coral living in isolation,tufts of virginal genus Oculina formerly known by the name “whitecoral,” prickly fungus coral in the shape of mushrooms, sea anemoneholding on by their muscular disks, providing a literal flowerbedadorned by jellyfish from the genus Porpita wearing collars of azuretentacles, and starfish that spangled the sand, including veinlikefeather stars from the genus Asterophyton that were like fine laceembroidered by the hands of water nymphs, their festoons swaying tothe faint undulations caused by our walking. It filled me with realchagrin to crush underfoot the gleaming mollusk samples that litteredthe seafloor by the thousands: concentric comb shells, hammer shells,coquina (seashells that actually hop around), top-shell snails, redhelmet shells, angel-wing conchs, sea hares, and so many otherexhibits from this inexhaustible ocean. But we had to keep walking,and we went forward while overhead there scudded schools of Portuguesemen-of-war that let their ultramarine tentacles drift in their wakes,medusas whose milky white or dainty pink parasols were festooned withazure tassels and shaded us from the sun’s rays, plus jellyfish of thespecies Pelagia panopyra that, in the dark, would have strewn our pathwith phosphorescent glimmers!All these wonders I glimpsed in the space of a quarter of a mile,barely pausing, following Captain Nemo whose gestures kept beckoningme onward. Soon the nature of the seafloor changed. The plains of sandwere followed by a bed of that viscous slime Americans call “ooze,”which is composed exclusively of seashells rich in limestone orsilica. Then we crossed a prairie of algae, open-sea plants that thewaters hadn’t yet torn loose, whose vegetation grew in wildprofusion. Soft to the foot, these densely textured lawns would haverivaled the most luxuriant carpets woven by the hand of man. But whilethis greenery was sprawling under our steps, it didn’t neglect usoverhead. The surface of the water was crisscrossed by a floatingarbor of marine plants belonging to that superabundant algae familythat numbers more than 2,000 known species. I saw long ribbons offucus drifting above me, some globular, others tubular: Laurencia,Cladostephus with the slenderest foliage, Rhodymenia palmataresembling the fan shapes of cactus. I observed that green-coloredplants kept closer to the surface of the sea, while reds occupied amedium depth, which left blacks and browns in charge of designinggardens and flowerbeds in the ocean’s lower strata.These algae are a genuine prodigy of creation, one of the wonders ofworld flora. This family produces both the biggest and smallestvegetables in the world. Because, just as 40,000 near-invisible budshave been counted in one five-square-millimeter space, so also havefucus plants been gathered that were over 500 meters long!We had been gone from the Nautilus for about an hour and a half. Itwas almost noon. I spotted this fact in the perpendicularity of thesun’s rays, which were no longer refracted. The magic of these solarcolors disappeared little by little, with emerald and sapphire shadesvanishing from our surroundings altogether. We walked with steadysteps that rang on the seafloor with astonishing intensity. Thetiniest sounds were transmitted with a speed to which the ear isunaccustomed on shore. In fact, water is a better conductor of soundthan air, and under the waves noises carry four times as fast.Just then the seafloor began to slope sharply downward. The light tookon a uniform hue. We reached a depth of 100 meters, by which point wewere undergoing a pressure of ten atmospheres. But my diving clotheswere built along such lines that I never suffered from thispressure. I felt only a certain tightness in the joints of my fingers,and even this discomfort soon disappeared. As for the exhaustion boundto accompany a two-hour stroll in such unfamiliar trappings—it wasnil. Helped by the water, my movements were executed with startlingease.Arriving at this 300-foot depth, I still detected the sun’s rays, butjust barely. Their intense brilliance had been followed by a reddishtwilight, a midpoint between day and night. But we could see wellenough to find our way, and it still wasn’t necessary to activate theRuhmkorff device.Just then Captain Nemo stopped. He waited until I joined him, then hepointed a finger at some dark masses outlined in the shadows a shortdistance away.“It’s the forest of Crespo Island,” I thought; and I was not mistaken.CHAPTER 17An Underwater ForestWE HAD FINALLY arrived on the outskirts of this forest, surely one ofthe finest in Captain Nemo’s immense domains. He regarded it as hisown and had laid the same claim to it that, in the first days of theworld, the first men had to their forests on land. Besides, who elsecould dispute his ownership of this underwater property? What other,bolder pioneer would come, ax in hand, to clear away its darkunderbrush?This forest was made up of big treelike plants, and when we enteredbeneath their huge arches, my eyes were instantly struck by the uniquearrangement of their branches—an arrangement that I had never beforeencountered.None of the weeds carpeting the seafloor, none of the branchesbristling from the shrubbery, crept, or leaned, or stretched on ahorizontal plane. They all rose right up toward the surface of theocean. Every filament or ribbon, no matter how thin, stood ramrodstraight. Fucus plants and creepers were growing in stiffperpendicular lines, governed by the density of the element thatgenerated them. After I parted them with my hands, these otherwisemotionless plants would shoot right back to their originalpositions. It was the regime of verticality.I soon grew accustomed to this bizarre arrangement, likewise to thecomparative darkness surrounding us. The seafloor in this forest wasstrewn with sharp chunks of stone that were hard to avoid. Here therange of underwater flora seemed pretty comprehensive to me, as wellas more abundant than it might have been in the arctic or tropicalzones, where such exhibits are less common. But for a few minutes Ikept accidentally confusing the two kingdoms, mistaking zoophytes forwater plants, animals for vegetables. And who hasn’t made the sameblunder? Flora and fauna are so closely associated in the underwaterworld!I observed that all these exhibits from the vegetable kingdom wereattached to the seafloor by only the most makeshift methods. They hadno roots and didn’t care which solid objects secured them, sand,shells, husks, or pebbles; they didn’t ask their hosts for sustenance,just a point of purchase. These plants are entirely self-propagating,and the principle of their existence lies in the water that sustainsand nourishes them. In place of leaves, most of them sprouted bladesof unpredictable shape, which were confined to a narrow gamut ofcolors consisting only of pink, crimson, green, olive, tan, andbrown. There I saw again, but not yet pressed and dried like theNautilus’s specimens, some peacock’s tails spread open like fans tostir up a cooling breeze, scarlet rosetangle, sea tangle stretchingout their young and edible shoots, twisting strings of kelp from thegenus Nereocystis that bloomed to a height of fifteen meters, bouquetsof mermaid’s cups whose stems grew wider at the top, and a number ofother open-sea plants, all without flowers. “It’s an odd anomaly inthis bizarre element!” as one witty naturalist puts it. “The animalkingdom blossoms, and the vegetable kingdom doesn’t!”These various types of shrubbery were as big as trees in the temperatezones; in the damp shade between them, there were clustered actualbushes of moving flowers, hedges of zoophytes in which there grewstony coral striped with twisting furrows, yellowish sea anemone fromthe genus Caryophylia with translucent tentacles, plus anemone withgrassy tufts from the genus Zoantharia; and to complete the illusion,minnows flitted from branch to branch like a swarm of hummingbirds,while there rose underfoot, like a covey of snipe, yellow fish fromthe genus Lepisocanthus with bristling jaws and sharp scales, flyinggurnards, and pinecone fish.Near one o’clock, Captain Nemo gave the signal to halt. Speaking formyself, I was glad to oblige, and we stretched out beneath an arbor ofwinged kelp, whose long thin tendrils stood up like arrows.This short break was a delight. It lacked only the charm ofconversation. But it was impossible to speak, impossible to reply. Isimply nudged my big copper headpiece against Conseil’s headpiece. Isaw a happy gleam in the gallant lad’s eyes, and to communicate hispleasure, he jiggled around inside his carapace in the world’ssilliest way.After four hours of strolling, I was quite astonished not to feel anyintense hunger. What kept my stomach in such a good mood I’m unable tosay. But, in exchange, I experienced that irresistible desire forsleep that comes over every diver. Accordingly, my eyes soon closedbehind their heavy glass windows and I fell into an uncontrollabledoze, which until then I had been able to fight off only through themovements of our walking. Captain Nemo and his muscular companion werealready stretched out in this clear crystal, setting us a fine naptimeexample.How long I was sunk in this torpor I cannot estimate; but when Iawoke, it seemed as if the sun were settling toward thehorizon. Captain Nemo was already up, and I had started to stretch mylimbs, when an unexpected apparition brought me sharply to my feet.A few paces away, a monstrous, meter-high sea spider was staring at mewith beady eyes, poised to spring at me. Although my diving suit washeavy enough to protect me from this animal’s bites, I couldn’t keepback a shudder of horror. Just then Conseil woke up, together with theNautilus’s sailor. Captain Nemo alerted his companion to this hideouscrustacean, which a swing of the rifle butt quickly brought down, andI watched the monster’s horrible legs writhing in dreadfulconvulsions.This encounter reminded me that other, more daunting animals must belurking in these dark reaches, and my diving suit might not beadequate protection against their attacks. Such thoughts hadn’tpreviously crossed my mind, and I was determined to keep on myguard. Meanwhile I had assumed this rest period would be the turningpoint in our stroll, but I was mistaken; and instead of heading backto the Nautilus, Captain Nemo continued his daring excursion.The seafloor kept sinking, and its significantly steeper slope took usto greater depths. It must have been nearly three o’clock when wereached a narrow valley gouged between high, vertical walls andlocated 150 meters down. Thanks to the perfection of our equipment, wehad thus gone ninety meters below the limit that nature had, untilthen, set on man’s underwater excursions.I say 150 meters, although I had no instruments for estimating thisdistance. But I knew that the sun’s rays, even in the clearest seas,could reach no deeper. So at precisely this point the darkness becameprofound. Not a single object was visible past tenpaces. Consequently, I had begun to grope my way when suddenly I sawthe glow of an intense white light. Captain Nemo had just activatedhis electric device. His companion did likewise. Conseil and Ifollowed suit. By turning a switch, I established contact between theinduction coil and the glass spiral, and the sea, lit up by our fourlanterns, was illuminated for a radius of twenty-five meters.Captain Nemo continued to plummet into the dark depths of this forest,whose shrubbery grew ever more sparse. I observed that vegetable lifewas disappearing more quickly than animal life. The open-sea plantshad already left behind the increasingly arid seafloor, where aprodigious number of animals were still swarming: zoophytes,articulates, mollusks, and fish.While we were walking, I thought the lights of our Ruhmkorff deviceswould automatically attract some inhabitants of these dark strata. Butif they did approach us, at least they kept at a distance regrettablefrom the hunter’s standpoint. Several times I saw Captain Nemo stopand take aim with his rifle; then, after sighting down its barrel fora few seconds, he would straighten up and resume his walk.Finally, at around four o’clock, this marvelous excursion came to anend. A wall of superb rocks stood before us, imposing in its sheermass: a pile of gigantic stone blocks, an enormous granite cliffsidepitted with dark caves but not offering a single gradient we couldclimb up. This was the underpinning of Crespo Island. This was land.The captain stopped suddenly. A gesture from him brought us to a halt,and however much I wanted to clear this wall, I had to stop. Hereended the domains of Captain Nemo. He had no desire to pass beyondthem. Farther on lay a part of the globe he would no longer treadunderfoot.Our return journey began. Captain Nemo resumed the lead in our littleband, always heading forward without hesitation. I noted that wedidn’t follow the same path in returning to the Nautilus. This newroute, very steep and hence very arduous, quickly took us close to thesurface of the sea. But this return to the upper strata wasn’t sosudden that decompression took place too quickly, which could have ledto serious organic disorders and given us those internal injuries sofatal to divers. With great promptness, the light reappeared and grewstronger; and the refraction of the sun, already low on the horizon,again ringed the edges of various objects with the entire colorspectrum.At a depth of ten meters, we walked amid a swarm of small fish fromevery species, more numerous than birds in the air, more agile too;but no aquatic game worthy of a gunshot had yet been offered to oureyes.Just then I saw the captain’s weapon spring to his shoulder and tracka moving object through the bushes. A shot went off, I heard a fainthissing, and an animal dropped a few paces away, literally struck bylightning.It was a magnificent sea otter from the genus Enhydra, the onlyexclusively marine quadruped. One and a half meters long, this otterhad to be worth a good high price. Its coat, chestnut brown above andsilver below, would have made one of those wonderful fur pieces somuch in demand in the Russian and Chinese markets; the fineness andluster of its pelt guaranteed that it would go for at least 2,000francs. I was full of wonderment at this unusual mammal, with itscircular head adorned by short ears, its round eyes, its whitewhiskers like those on a cat, its webbed and clawed feet, its bushytail. Hunted and trapped by fishermen, this valuable carnivore hasbecome extremely rare, and it takes refuge chiefly in the northernmostparts of the Pacific, where in all likelihood its species will soon befacing extinction.Captain Nemo’s companion picked up the animal, loaded it on hisshoulder, and we took to the trail again.For an hour plains of sand unrolled before our steps. Often theseafloor rose to within two meters of the surface of the water. Icould then see our images clearly mirrored on the underside of thewaves, but reflected upside down: above us there appeared an identicalband that duplicated our every movement and gesture; in short, aperfect likeness of the quartet near which it walked, but with headsdown and feet in the air.Another unusual effect. Heavy clouds passed above us, forming andfading swiftly. But after thinking it over, I realized that theseso-called clouds were caused simply by the changing densities of thelong ground swells, and I even spotted the foaming “white caps” thattheir breaking crests were proliferating over the surface of thewater. Lastly, I couldn’t help seeing the actual shadows of largebirds passing over our heads, swiftly skimming the surface of the sea.On this occasion I witnessed one of the finest gunshots ever to thrillthe marrow of a hunter. A large bird with a wide wingspan, quiteclearly visible, approached and hovered over us. When it was just afew meters above the waves, Captain Nemo’s companion took aim andfired. The animal dropped, electrocuted, and its descent brought itwithin reach of our adroit hunter, who promptly took possession ofit. It was an albatross of the finest species, a wonderful specimen ofthese open-sea fowl.This incident did not interrupt our walk. For two hours we weresometimes led over plains of sand, sometimes over prairies of seaweedthat were quite arduous to cross. In all honesty, I was dead tired bythe time I spotted a hazy glow half a mile away, cutting through thedarkness of the waters. It was the Nautilus’s beacon. Within twentyminutes we would be on board, and there I could breathe easyagain—because my tank’s current air supply seemed to be quite low inoxygen. But I was reckoning without an encounter that slightly delayedour arrival.I was lagging behind some twenty paces when I saw Captain Nemosuddenly come back toward me. With his powerful hands he sent mebuckling to the ground, while his companion did the same toConseil. At first I didn’t know what to make of this sudden assault,but I was reassured to observe the captain lying motionless beside me.I was stretched out on the seafloor directly beneath some bushes ofalgae, when I raised my head and spied two enormous masses hurtlingby, throwing off phosphorescent glimmers.My blood turned cold in my veins! I saw that we were under threat froma fearsome pair of sharks. They were blue sharks, dreadful man-eaterswith enormous tails, dull, glassy stares, and phosphorescent matteroozing from holes around their snouts. They were like monstrousfireflies that could thoroughly pulverize a man in their iron jaws! Idon’t know if Conseil was busy with their classification, but as forme, I looked at their silver bellies, their fearsome mouths bristlingwith teeth, from a viewpoint less than scientific—more as a victimthan as a professor of natural history.Luckily these voracious animals have poor eyesight. They went bywithout noticing us, grazing us with their brownish fins; andmiraculously, we escaped a danger greater than encountering a tigerdeep in the jungle.Half an hour later, guided by its electric trail, we reached theNautilus. The outside door had been left open, and Captain Nemo closedit after we reentered the first cell. Then he pressed a button. Iheard pumps operating within the ship, I felt the water loweringaround me, and in a few moments the cell was completely empty. Theinside door opened, and we passed into the wardrobe.There our diving suits were removed, not without difficulty; andutterly exhausted, faint from lack of food and rest, I repaired to mystateroom, full of wonder at this startling excursion on the bottom ofthe sea.CHAPTER 18Four Thousand Leagues Under the PacificBY THE NEXT MORNING, November 18, I was fully recovered from myexhaustion of the day before, and I climbed onto the platform just asthe Nautilus’s chief officer was pronouncing his daily phrase. It thenoccurred to me that these words either referred to the state of thesea, or that they meant: “There’s nothing in sight.”And in truth, the ocean was deserted. Not a sail on the horizon. Thetips of Crespo Island had disappeared during the night. The sea,absorbing every color of the prism except its blue rays, reflected thelatter in every direction and sported a wonderful indigo tint. Theundulating waves regularly took on the appearance of watered silk withwide stripes.I was marveling at this magnificent ocean view when Captain Nemoappeared. He didn’t seem to notice my presence and began a series ofastronomical observations. Then, his operations finished, he went andleaned his elbows on the beacon housing, his eyes straying over thesurface of the ocean.Meanwhile some twenty of the Nautilus’s sailors—all energetic,well-built fellows—climbed onto the platform. They had come to pull upthe nets left in our wake during the night. These seamen obviouslybelonged to different nationalities, although indications of Europeanphysical traits could be seen in them all. If I’m not mistaken, Irecognized some Irishmen, some Frenchmen, a few Slavs, and a native ofeither Greece or Crete. Even so, these men were frugal of speech andused among themselves only that bizarre dialect whose origin Icouldn’t even guess. So I had to give up any notions of questioningthem.The nets were hauled on board. They were a breed of trawl resemblingthose used off the Normandy coast, huge pouches held half open by afloating pole and a chain laced through the lower meshes. Trailing inthis way from these iron glove makers, the resulting receptaclesscoured the ocean floor and collected every marine exhibit in theirpath. That day they gathered up some unusual specimens from thesefish-filled waterways: anglerfish whose comical movements qualify themfor the epithet “clowns,” black Commerson anglers equipped with theirantennas, undulating triggerfish encircled by little red bands,bloated puffers whose venom is extremely insidious, some olive-huedlampreys, snipefish covered with silver scales, cutlass fish whoseelectrocuting power equals that of the electric eel and the electricray, scaly featherbacks with brown crosswise bands, greenish codfish,several varieties of goby, etc.; finally, some fish of largerproportions: a one-meter jack with a prominent head, several finebonito from the genus Scomber decked out in the colors blue andsilver, and three magnificent tuna whose high speeds couldn’t savethem from our trawl.I estimate that this cast of the net brought in more than 1,000 poundsof fish. It was a fine catch but not surprising. In essence, thesenets stayed in our wake for several hours, incarcerating an entireaquatic world in prisons made of thread. So we were never lacking inprovisions of the highest quality, which the Nautilus’s speed and theallure of its electric light could continually replenish.These various exhibits from the sea were immediately lowered down thehatch in the direction of the storage lockers, some to be eaten fresh,others to be preserved.After its fishing was finished and its air supply renewed, I thoughtthe Nautilus would resume its underwater excursion, and I was gettingready to return to my stateroom, when Captain Nemo turned to me andsaid without further preamble:“Look at this ocean, professor! Doesn’t it have the actual gift oflife? Doesn’t it experience both anger and affection? Last evening itwent to sleep just as we did, and there it is, waking up after apeaceful night!”No hellos or good mornings for this gent! You would have thought thiseccentric individual was simply continuing a conversation we’d alreadystarted!“See!” he went on. “It’s waking up under the sun’s caresses! It’sgoing to relive its daily existence! What a fascinating field of studylies in watching the play of its organism. It owns a pulse andarteries, it has spasms, and I side with the scholarly CommanderMaury, who discovered that it has a circulation as real as thecirculation of blood in animals.”I’m sure that Captain Nemo expected no replies from me, and it seemedpointless to pitch in with “Ah yes,” “Exactly,” or “How right youare!” Rather, he was simply talking to himself, with long pausesbetween sentences. He was meditating out loud.“Yes,” he said, “the ocean owns a genuine circulation, and to start itgoing, the Creator of All Things has only to increase its heat, salt,and microscopic animal life. In essence, heat creates the differentdensities that lead to currents and countercurrents. Evaporation,which is nil in the High Arctic regions and very active in equatorialzones, brings about a constant interchange of tropical and polarwaters. What’s more, I’ve detected those falling and rising currentsthat make up the ocean’s true breathing. I’ve seen a molecule of saltwater heat up at the surface, sink into the depths, reach maximumdensity at -2 degrees centigrade, then cool off, grow lighter, andrise again. At the poles you’ll see the consequences of thisphenomenon, and through this law of farseeing nature, you’llunderstand why water can freeze only at the surface!”As the captain was finishing his sentence, I said to myself: “Thepole! Is this brazen individual claiming he’ll take us even to thatlocation?”Meanwhile the captain fell silent and stared at the element he hadstudied so thoroughly and unceasingly. Then, going on:“Salts,” he said, “fill the sea in considerable quantities, professor,and if you removed all its dissolved saline content, you’d create amass measuring 4,500,000 cubic leagues, which if it were spread allover the globe, would form a layer more than ten meters high. Anddon’t think that the presence of these salts is due merely to somewhim of nature. No. They make ocean water less open to evaporation andprevent winds from carrying off excessive amounts of steam, which,when condensing, would submerge the temperate zones. Salts play aleading role, the role of stabilizer for the general ecology of theglobe!”Captain Nemo stopped, straightened up, took a few steps along theplatform, and returned to me:“As for those billions of tiny animals,” he went on, “those infusoriathat live by the millions in one droplet of water, 800,000 of whichare needed to weigh one milligram, their role is no lessimportant. They absorb the marine salts, they assimilate the solidelements in the water, and since they create coral and madrepores,they’re the true builders of limestone continents! And so, afterthey’ve finished depriving our water drop of its mineral nutrients,the droplet gets lighter, rises to the surface, there absorbs moresalts left behind through evaporation, gets heavier, sinks again, andbrings those tiny animals new elements to absorb. The outcome: adouble current, rising and falling, constant movement, constant life!More intense than on land, more abundant, more infinite, such lifeblooms in every part of this ocean, an element fatal to man, they say,but vital to myriads of animals—and to me!”When Captain Nemo spoke in this way, he was transfigured, and hefilled me with extraordinary excitement.“There,” he added, “out there lies true existence! And I can imaginethe founding of nautical towns, clusters of underwater householdsthat, like the Nautilus, would return to the surface of the sea tobreathe each morning, free towns if ever there were, independentcities! Then again, who knows whether some tyrant . . .”Captain Nemo finished his sentence with a vehement gesture. Then,addressing me directly, as if to drive away an ugly thought:“Professor Aronnax,” he asked me, “do you know the depth of the oceanfloor?”“At least, captain, I know what the major soundings tell us.”“Could you quote them to me, so I can double-check them as the needarises?”“Here,” I replied, “are a few of them that stick in my memory. If I’mnot mistaken, an average depth of 8,200 meters was found in the northAtlantic, and 2,500 meters in the Mediterranean. The most remarkablesoundings were taken in the south Atlantic near the 35th parallel, andthey gave 12,000 meters, 14,091 meters, and 15,149 meters. All in all,it’s estimated that if the sea bottom were made level, its averagedepth would be about seven kilometers.”“Well, professor,” Captain Nemo replied, “we’ll show you better thanthat, I hope. As for the average depth of this part of the Pacific,I’ll inform you that it’s a mere 4,000 meters.”This said, Captain Nemo headed to the hatch and disappeared down theladder. I followed him and went back to the main lounge. The propellerwas instantly set in motion, and the log gave our speed as twentymiles per hour.Over the ensuing days and weeks, Captain Nemo was very frugal with hisvisits. I saw him only at rare intervals. His chief officer regularlyfixed the positions I found reported on the chart, and in such a waythat I could exactly plot the Nautilus’s course.Conseil and Land spent the long hours with me. Conseil had told hisfriend about the wonders of our undersea stroll, and the Canadian wassorry he hadn’t gone along. But I hoped an opportunity would arise fora visit to the forests of Oceania.Almost every day the panels in the lounge were open for some hours,and our eyes never tired of probing the mysteries of the underwaterworld.The Nautilus’s general heading was southeast, and it stayed at a depthbetween 100 and 150 meters. However, from lord-knows-what whim, oneday it did a diagonal dive by means of its slanting fins, reachingstrata located 2,000 meters underwater. The thermometer indicated atemperature of 4.25 degrees centigrade, which at this depth seemed tobe a temperature common to all latitudes.On November 26, at three o’clock in the morning, the Nautilus clearedthe Tropic of Cancer at longitude 172 degrees. On the 27th it passedin sight of the Hawaiian Islands, where the famous Captain Cook methis death on February 14, 1779. By then we had fared 4,860 leaguesfrom our starting point. When I arrived on the platform that morning,I saw the Island of Hawaii two miles to leeward, the largest of theseven islands making up this group. I could clearly distinguish thetilled soil on its outskirts, the various mountain chains runningparallel with its coastline, and its volcanoes, crowned by Mauna Kea,whose elevation is 5,000 meters above sea level. Among other specimensfrom these waterways, our nets brought up some peacock-tailedflabellarian coral, polyps flattened into stylish shapes and unique tothis part of the ocean.The Nautilus kept to its southeasterly heading. On December 1 it cutthe equator at longitude 142 degrees, and on the 4th of the samemonth, after a quick crossing marked by no incident, we raised theMarquesas Islands. Three miles off, in latitude 8 degrees 57’ southand longitude 139 degrees 32’ west, I spotted Martin Point on NukuHiva, chief member of this island group that belongs to France. Icould make out only its wooded mountains on the horizon, becauseCaptain Nemo hated to hug shore. There our nets brought up some finefish samples: dolphinfish with azure fins, gold tails, and fleshthat’s unrivaled in the entire world, wrasse from the genusHologymnosus that were nearly denuded of scales but exquisite inflavor, knifejaws with bony beaks, yellowish albacore that were astasty as bonito, all fish worth classifying in the ship’s pantry.After leaving these delightful islands to the protection of the Frenchflag, the Nautilus covered about 2,000 miles from December 4 to the11th. Its navigating was marked by an encounter with an immense schoolof squid, unusual mollusks that are near neighbors of thecuttlefish. French fishermen give them the name “cuckoldfish,” andthey belong to the class Cephalopoda, family Dibranchiata, consistingof themselves together with cuttlefish and argonauts. The naturalistsof antiquity made a special study of them, and these animals furnishedmany ribald figures of speech for soapbox orators in the Greekmarketplace, as well as excellent dishes for the tables of richcitizens, if we’re to believe Athenaeus, a Greek physician predatingGalen.It was during the night of December 9-10 that the Nautilus encounteredthis army of distinctly nocturnal mollusks. They numbered in themillions. They were migrating from the temperate zones toward zonesstill warmer, following the itineraries of herring and sardines. Westared at them through our thick glass windows: they swam backwardwith tremendous speed, moving by means of their locomotive tubes,chasing fish and mollusks, eating the little ones, eaten by the bigones, and tossing in indescribable confusion the ten feet that naturehas rooted in their heads like a hairpiece of pneumaticsnakes. Despite its speed, the Nautilus navigated for several hours inthe midst of this school of animals, and its nets brought up anincalculable number, among which I recognized all nine species thatProfessor Orbigny has classified as native to the Pacific Ocean.During this crossing, the sea continually lavished us with the mostmarvelous sights. Its variety was infinite. It changed its setting anddecor for the mere pleasure of our eyes, and we were called upon notsimply to contemplate the works of our Creator in the midst of theliquid element, but also to probe the ocean’s most daunting mysteries.During the day of December 11, I was busy reading in the mainlounge. Ned Land and Conseil were observing the luminous watersthrough the gaping panels. The Nautilus was motionless. Its ballasttanks full, it was sitting at a depth of 1,000 meters in acomparatively unpopulated region of the ocean where only larger fishput in occasional appearances.Just then I was studying a delightful book by Jean Macé, The Servantsof the Stomach, and savoring its ingenious teachings, when Conseilinterrupted my reading.“Would master kindly come here for an instant?” he said to me in anodd voice.“What is it, Conseil?”“It’s something that master should see.”I stood up, went, leaned on my elbows before the window, and I saw it.In the broad electric daylight, an enormous black mass, quitemotionless, hung suspended in the midst of the waters. I observed itcarefully, trying to find out the nature of this giganticcetacean. Then a sudden thought crossed my mind.“A ship!” I exclaimed.“Yes,” the Canadian replied, “a disabled craft that’s sinking straightdown!”Ned Land was not mistaken. We were in the presence of a ship whosesevered shrouds still hung from their clasps. Its hull looked in goodcondition, and it must have gone under only a few hours before. Thestumps of three masts, chopped off two feet above the deck, indicateda flooding ship that had been forced to sacrifice its masting. But ithad heeled sideways, filling completely, and it was listing to porteven yet. A sorry sight, this carcass lost under the waves, butsorrier still was the sight on its deck, where, lashed with ropes toprevent their being washed overboard, some human corpses still lay! Icounted four of them—four men, one still standing at the helm—then awoman, halfway out of a skylight on the afterdeck, holding a child inher arms. This woman was young. Under the brilliant lighting of theNautilus’s rays, I could make out her features, which the water hadn’tyet decomposed. With a supreme effort, she had lifted her child aboveher head, and the poor little creature’s arms were still twined aroundits mother’s neck! The postures of the four seamen seemed ghastly tome, twisted from convulsive movements, as if making a last effort tobreak loose from the ropes that bound them to their ship. And thehelmsman, standing alone, calmer, his face smooth and serious, hisgrizzled hair plastered to his brow, his hands clutching the wheel,seemed even yet to be guiding his wrecked three-master through theocean depths!What a scene! We stood dumbstruck, hearts pounding, before thisshipwreck caught in the act, as if it had been photographed in itsfinal moments, so to speak! And already I could see enormous sharksmoving in, eyes ablaze, drawn by the lure of human flesh!Meanwhile, turning, the Nautilus made a circle around the sinkingship, and for an instant I could read the board on its stern:The Florida Sunderland, EnglandCHAPTER 19VanikoroTHIS DREADFUL SIGHT was the first of a whole series of maritimecatastrophes that the Nautilus would encounter on its run. When itplied more heavily traveled seas, we often saw wrecked hulls rottingin midwater, and farther down, cannons, shells, anchors, chains, and athousand other iron objects rusting away.Meanwhile, continuously swept along by the Nautilus, where we lived innear isolation, we raised the Tuamotu Islands on December 11, that old“dangerous group” associated with the French global navigatorCommander Bougainville; it stretches from Ducie Island to LazareffIsland over an area of 500 leagues from the east-southeast to thewest-northwest, between latitude 13 degrees 30’ and 23 degrees 50’south, and between longitude 125 degrees 30’ and 151 degrees 30’west. This island group covers a surface area of 370 square leagues,and it’s made up of some sixty subgroups, among which we noted theGambier group, which is a French protectorate. These islands are coralformations. Thanks to the work of polyps, a slow but steady upheavalwill someday connect these islands to each other. Later on, this newisland will be fused to its neighboring island groups, and a fifthcontinent will stretch from New Zealand and New Caledonia as far asthe Marquesas Islands.The day I expounded this theory to Captain Nemo, he answered mecoldly:“The earth doesn’t need new continents, but new men!”Sailors’ luck led the Nautilus straight to Reao Island, one of themost unusual in this group, which was discovered in 1822 by CaptainBell aboard the Minerva. So I was able to study the madreporic processthat has created the islands in this ocean.Madrepores, which one must guard against confusing with preciouscoral, clothe their tissue in a limestone crust, and their variationsin structure have led my famous mentor Professor Milne-Edwards toclassify them into five divisions. The tiny microscopic animals thatsecrete this polypary live by the billions in the depths of theircells. Their limestone deposits build up into rocks, reefs, islets,islands. In some places, they form atolls, a circular ring surroundinga lagoon or small inner lake that gaps place in contact with thesea. Elsewhere, they take the shape of barrier reefs, such as thosethat exist along the coasts of New Caledonia and several of theTuamotu Islands. In still other localities, such as Réunion Island andthe island of Mauritius, they build fringing reefs, high, straightwalls next to which the ocean’s depth is considerable.While cruising along only a few cable lengths from the underpinning ofReao Island, I marveled at the gigantic piece of work accomplished bythese microscopic laborers. These walls were the express achievementsof madrepores known by the names fire coral, finger coral, star coral,and stony coral. These polyps grow exclusively in the agitated strataat the surface of the sea, and so it’s in the upper reaches that theybegin these substructures, which sink little by little together withthe secreted rubble binding them. This, at least, is the theory ofMr. Charles Darwin, who thus explains the formation of atolls—a theorysuperior, in my view, to the one that says these madreporic edificessit on the summits of mountains or volcanoes submerged a few feetbelow sea level.I could observe these strange walls quite closely: our sounding linesindicated that they dropped perpendicularly for more than 300 meters,and our electric beams made the bright limestone positively sparkle.In reply to a question Conseil asked me about the growth rate of thesecolossal barriers, I thoroughly amazed him by saying that scientistsput it at an eighth of an inch per biennium.“Therefore,” he said to me, “to build these walls, it took . . . ?”“192,000 years, my gallant Conseil, which significantly extends thebiblical Days of Creation. What’s more, the formation of coal—in otherwords, the petrification of forests swallowed by floods—and thecooling of basaltic rocks likewise call for a much longer period oftime. I might add that those ‘days’ in the Bible must represent wholeepochs and not literally the lapse of time between two sunrises,because according to the Bible itself, the sun doesn’t date from thefirst day of Creation.”When the Nautilus returned to the surface of the ocean, I could takein Reao Island over its whole flat, wooded expanse. Obviously itsmadreporic rocks had been made fertile by tornadoes andthunderstorms. One day, carried off by a hurricane from neighboringshores, some seed fell onto these limestone beds, mixing withdecomposed particles of fish and marine plants to form vegetablehumus. Propelled by the waves, a coconut arrived on this newcoast. Its germ took root. Its tree grew tall, catching steam off thewater. A brook was born. Little by little, vegetation spread. Tinyanimals—worms, insects—rode ashore on tree trunks snatched fromislands to windward. Turtles came to lay their eggs. Birds nested inthe young trees. In this way animal life developed, and drawn by thegreenery and fertile soil, man appeared. And that’s how these islandswere formed, the immense achievement of microscopic animals.Near evening Reao Island melted into the distance, and the Nautilusnoticeably changed course. After touching the Tropic of Capricorn atlongitude 135 degrees, it headed west-northwest, going back up thewhole intertropical zone. Although the summer sun lavished its rays onus, we never suffered from the heat, because thirty or forty metersunderwater, the temperature didn’t go over 10 degrees to 12 degreescentigrade.By December 15 we had left the alluring Society Islands in the west,likewise elegant Tahiti, queen of the Pacific. In the morning Ispotted this island’s lofty summits a few miles to leeward. Its waterssupplied excellent fish for the tables on board: mackerel, bonito,albacore, and a few varieties of that sea serpent named the moray eel.The Nautilus had cleared 8,100 miles. We logged 9,720 miles when wepassed between the Tonga Islands, where crews from the Argo,Port-au-Prince, and Duke of Portland had perished, and the islandgroup of Samoa, scene of the slaying of Captain de Langle, friend ofthat long-lost navigator, the Count de La Pérouse. Then we raised theFiji Islands, where savages slaughtered sailors from the Union, aswell as Captain Bureau, commander of the Darling Josephine out ofNantes, France.Extending over an expanse of 100 leagues north to south, and over 90leagues east to west, this island group lies between latitude 2degrees and 6 degrees south, and between longitude 174 degrees and 179degrees west. It consists of a number of islands, islets, and reefs,among which we noted the islands of Viti Levu, Vanua Levu, and Kadavu.It was the Dutch navigator Tasman who discovered this group in 1643,the same year the Italian physicist Torricelli invented the barometerand King Louis XIV ascended the French throne. I’ll let the readerdecide which of these deeds was more beneficial to humanity. Cominglater, Captain Cook in 1774, Rear Admiral d’Entrecasteaux in 1793, andfinally Captain Dumont d’Urville in 1827, untangled the whole chaoticgeography of this island group. The Nautilus drew near Wailea Bay, anunlucky place for England’s Captain Dillon, who was the first to shedlight on the longstanding mystery surrounding the disappearance ofships under the Count de La Pérouse.This bay, repeatedly dredged, furnished a huge supply of excellentoysters. As the Roman playwright Seneca recommended, we opened themright at our table, then stuffed ourselves. These mollusks belonged tothe species known by name as Ostrea lamellosa, whose members are quitecommon off Corsica. This Wailea oysterbank must have been extensive,and for certain, if they hadn’t been controlled by numerous naturalchecks, these clusters of shellfish would have ended up jam-packingthe bay, since as many as 2,000,000 eggs have been counted in a singleindividual.And if Mr. Ned Land did not repent of his gluttony at our oyster fest,it’s because oysters are the only dish that never causesindigestion. In fact, it takes no less than sixteen dozen of theseheadless mollusks to supply the 315 grams that satisfy one man’sminimum daily requirement for nitrogen.On December 25 the Nautilus navigated amid the island group of the NewHebrides, which the Portuguese seafarer Queirós discovered in 1606,which Commander Bougainville explored in 1768, and to which CaptainCook gave its current name in 1773. This group is chiefly made up ofnine large islands and forms a 120-league strip from thenorth-northwest to the south-southeast, lying between latitude 2degrees and 15 degrees south, and between longitude 164 degrees and168 degrees. At the moment of our noon sights, we passed fairly closeto the island of Aurou, which looked to me like a mass of green woodscrowned by a peak of great height.That day it was yuletide, and it struck me that Ned Land badly missedcelebrating “Christmas,” that genuine family holiday where Protestantsare such zealots.I hadn’t seen Captain Nemo for over a week, when, on the morning ofthe 27th, he entered the main lounge, as usual acting as if he’d beengone for just five minutes. I was busy tracing the Nautilus’s courseon the world map. The captain approached, placed a finger over aposition on the chart, and pronounced just one word:“Vanikoro.”This name was magic! It was the name of those islets where vesselsunder the Count de La Pérouse had miscarried. I straightened suddenly.“The Nautilus is bringing us to Vanikoro?” I asked.“Yes, professor,” the captain replied.“And I’ll be able to visit those famous islands where the Compass andthe Astrolabe came to grief?”“If you like, professor.”“When will we reach Vanikoro?”“We already have, professor.”Followed by Captain Nemo, I climbed onto the platform, and from theremy eyes eagerly scanned the horizon.In the northeast there emerged two volcanic islands of unequal size,surrounded by a coral reef whose circuit measured forty miles. We werefacing the island of Vanikoro proper, to which Captain Dumontd’Urville had given the name “Island of the Search”; we lay right infront of the little harbor of Vana, located in latitude 16 degrees 4’south and longitude 164 degrees 32’ east. Its shores seemed coveredwith greenery from its beaches to its summits inland, crowned byMt. Kapogo, which is 476 fathoms high.After clearing the outer belt of rocks via a narrow passageway, theNautilus lay inside the breakers where the sea had a depth of thirtyto forty fathoms. Under the green shade of some tropical evergreens, Ispotted a few savages who looked extremely startled at ourapproach. In this long, blackish object advancing flush with thewater, didn’t they see some fearsome cetacean that they were obligedto view with distrust?Just then Captain Nemo asked me what I knew about the shipwreck of theCount de La Pérouse.“What everybody knows, captain,” I answered him.“And could you kindly tell me what everybody knows?” he asked me in agently ironic tone.“Very easily.”I related to him what the final deeds of Captain Dumont d’Urville hadbrought to light, deeds described here in this heavily condensedsummary of the whole matter.In 1785 the Count de La Pérouse and his subordinate, Captain deLangle, were sent by King Louis XVI of France on a voyage tocircumnavigate the globe. They boarded two sloops of war, the Compassand the Astrolabe, which were never seen again.In 1791, justly concerned about the fate of these two sloops of war,the French government fitted out two large cargo boats, the Search andthe Hope, which left Brest on September 28 under orders from RearAdmiral Bruni d’Entrecasteaux. Two months later, testimony from acertain Commander Bowen, aboard the Albemarle, alleged that rubblefrom shipwrecked vessels had been seen on the coast of NewGeorgia. But d’Entrecasteaux was unaware of this news—which seemed abit dubious anyhow—and headed toward the Admiralty Islands, which hadbeen named in a report by one Captain Hunter as the site of the Countde La Pérouse’s shipwreck.They looked in vain. The Hope and the Search passed right by Vanikorowithout stopping there; and overall, this voyage was plagued bymisfortune, ultimately costing the lives of Rear Admirald’Entrecasteaux, two of his subordinate officers, and several seamenfrom his crew.It was an old hand at the Pacific, the English adventurer CaptainPeter Dillon, who was the first to pick up the trail left by castawaysfrom the wrecked vessels. On May 15, 1824, his ship, the St. Patrick,passed by Tikopia Island, one of the New Hebrides. There a nativeboatman pulled alongside in a dugout canoe and sold Dillon a silversword hilt bearing the imprint of characters engraved with a cuttingtool known as a burin. Furthermore, this native boatman claimed thatduring a stay in Vanikoro six years earlier, he had seen two Europeansbelonging to ships that had run aground on the island’s reefs manyyears before.Dillon guessed that the ships at issue were those under the Count deLa Pérouse, ships whose disappearance had shaken the entire world. Hetried to reach Vanikoro, where, according to the native boatman, agood deal of rubble from the shipwreck could still be found, but windsand currents prevented his doing so.Dillon returned to Calcutta. There he was able to interest the AsiaticSociety and the East India Company in his discovery. A ship namedafter the Search was placed at his disposal, and he departed onJanuary 23, 1827, accompanied by a French deputy.This new Search, after putting in at several stops over the Pacific,dropped anchor before Vanikoro on July 7, 1827, in the same harbor ofVana where the Nautilus was currently floating.There Dillon collected many relics of the shipwreck: iron utensils,anchors, eyelets from pulleys, swivel guns, an eighteen-pound shell,the remains of some astronomical instruments, a piece of sternrail,and a bronze bell bearing the inscription “Made by Bazin,” the foundrymark at Brest Arsenal around 1785. There could no longer be any doubt.Finishing his investigations, Dillon stayed at the site of thecasualty until the month of October. Then he left Vanikoro, headedtoward New Zealand, dropped anchor at Calcutta on April 7, 1828, andreturned to France, where he received a very cordial welcome from KingCharles X.But just then the renowned French explorer Captain Dumont d’Urville,unaware of Dillon’s activities, had already set sail to searchelsewhere for the site of the shipwreck. In essence, a whaling vesselhad reported that some medals and a Cross of St. Louis had been foundin the hands of savages in the Louisiade Islands and New Caledonia.So Captain Dumont d’Urville had put to sea in command of a vesselnamed after the Astrolabe, and just two months after Dillon had leftVanikoro, Dumont d’Urville dropped anchor before Hobart. There heheard about Dillon’s findings, and he further learned that a certainJames Hobbs, chief officer on the Union out of Calcutta, had put toshore on an island located in latitude 8 degrees 18’ south andlongitude 156 degrees 30’ east, and had noted the natives of thosewaterways making use of iron bars and red fabrics.Pretty perplexed, Dumont d’Urville didn’t know if he should givecredence to these reports, which had been carried in some of the lessreliable newspapers; nevertheless, he decided to start on Dillon’strail.On February 10, 1828, the new Astrolabe hove before Tikopia Island,took on a guide and interpreter in the person of a deserter who hadsettled there, plied a course toward Vanikoro, raised it on February12, sailed along its reefs until the 14th, and only on the 20thdropped anchor inside its barrier in the harbor of Vana.On the 23rd, several officers circled the island and brought back somerubble of little importance. The natives, adopting a system of denialand evasion, refused to guide them to the site of the casualty. Thisrather shady conduct aroused the suspicion that the natives hadmistreated the castaways; and in truth, the natives seemed afraid thatDumont d’Urville had come to avenge the Count de La Pérouse and hisunfortunate companions.But on the 26th, appeased with gifts and seeing that they didn’t needto fear any reprisals, the natives led the chief officer,Mr. Jacquinot, to the site of the shipwreck.At this location, in three or four fathoms of water between the Paeuand Vana reefs, there lay some anchors, cannons, and ingots of ironand lead, all caked with limestone concretions. A launch and whaleboatfrom the new Astrolabe were steered to this locality, and after goingto exhausting lengths, their crews managed to dredge up an anchorweighing 1,800 pounds, a cast-iron eight-pounder cannon, a lead ingot,and two copper swivel guns.Questioning the natives, Captain Dumont d’Urville also learned thatafter La Pérouse’s two ships had miscarried on the island’s reefs, thecount had built a smaller craft, only to go off and miscarry a secondtime. Where? Nobody knew.The commander of the new Astrolabe then had a monument erected under atuft of mangrove, in memory of the famous navigator and hiscompanions. It was a simple quadrangular pyramid, set on a coral base,with no ironwork to tempt the natives’ avarice.Then Dumont d’Urville tried to depart; but his crews were run downfrom the fevers raging on these unsanitary shores, and quite illhimself, he was unable to weigh anchor until March 17.Meanwhile, fearing that Dumont d’Urville wasn’t abreast of Dillon’sactivities, the French government sent a sloop of war to Vanikoro, theBayonnaise under Commander Legoarant de Tromelin, who had beenstationed on the American west coast. Dropping anchor before Vanikoroa few months after the new Astrolabe’s departure, the Bayonnaisedidn’t find any additional evidence but verified that the savageshadn’t disturbed the memorial honoring the Count de La Pérouse.This is the substance of the account I gave Captain Nemo.“So,” he said to me, “the castaways built a third ship on VanikoroIsland, and to this day, nobody knows where it went and perished?”“Nobody knows.”Captain Nemo didn’t reply but signaled me to follow him to the mainlounge. The Nautilus sank a few meters beneath the waves, and thepanels opened.I rushed to the window and saw crusts of coral: fungus coral,siphonula coral, alcyon coral, sea anemone from the genus Caryophylia,plus myriads of charming fish including greenfish, damselfish,sweepers, snappers, and squirrelfish; underneath this coral covering Idetected some rubble the old dredges hadn’t been able to tearfree—iron stirrups, anchors, cannons, shells, tackle from a capstan, astempost, all objects hailing from the wrecked ships and now carpetedin moving flowers.And as I stared at this desolate wreckage, Captain Nemo told me in asolemn voice:“Commander La Pérouse set out on December 7, 1785, with his ships, theCompass and the Astrolabe. He dropped anchor first at Botany Bay,visited the Tonga Islands and New Caledonia, headed toward the SantaCruz Islands, and put in at Nomuka, one of the islands in the Ha’apaigroup. Then his ships arrived at the unknown reefs ofVanikoro. Traveling in the lead, the Compass ran afoul of breakers onthe southerly coast. The Astrolabe went to its rescue and also ranaground. The first ship was destroyed almost immediately. The second,stranded to leeward, held up for some days. The natives gave thecastaways a fair enough welcome. The latter took up residence on theisland and built a smaller craft with rubble from the two largeones. A few seamen stayed voluntarily in Vanikoro. The others, weakand ailing, set sail with the Count de La Pérouse. They headed to theSolomon Islands, and they perished with all hands on the westerlycoast of the chief island in that group, between Cape Deception andCape Satisfaction!”“And how do you know all this?” I exclaimed.“Here’s what I found at the very site of that final shipwreck!”Captain Nemo showed me a tin box, stamped with the coat of arms ofFrance and all corroded by salt water. He opened it and I saw a bundleof papers, yellowed but still legible.They were the actual military orders given by France’s Minister of theNavy to Commander La Pérouse, with notes along the margin in thehandwriting of King Louis XVI!“Ah, what a splendid death for a seaman!” Captain Nemo then said. “Acoral grave is a tranquil grave, and may Heaven grant that mycompanions and I rest in no other!”CHAPTER 20The Torres StraitDURING THE NIGHT of December 27-28, the Nautilus left the waterways ofVanikoro behind with extraordinary speed. Its heading wassouthwesterly, and in three days it had cleared the 750 leagues thatseparated La Pérouse’s islands from the southeastern tip of Papua.On January 1, 1868, bright and early, Conseil joined me on theplatform.“Will master,” the gallant lad said to me, “allow me to wish him ahappy new year?”“Good heavens, Conseil, it’s just like old times in my office at theBotanical Gardens in Paris! I accept your kind wishes and I thank youfor them. Only, I’d like to know what you mean by a ‘happy year’ underthe circumstances in which we’re placed. Is it a year that will bringour imprisonment to an end, or a year that will see this strangevoyage continue?”“Ye gods,” Conseil replied, “I hardly know what to tell master. We’recertainly seeing some unusual things, and for two months we’ve had notime for boredom. The latest wonder is always the most astonishing,and if this progression keeps up, I can’t imagine what its climax willbe. In my opinion, we’ll never again have such an opportunity.”“Never, Conseil.”“Besides, Mr. Nemo really lives up to his Latin name, since hecouldn’t be less in the way if he didn’t exist.”“True enough, Conseil.”“Therefore, with all due respect to master, I think a ‘happy year’would be a year that lets us see everything—”“Everything, Conseil? No year could be that long. But what does NedLand think about all this?”“Ned Land’s thoughts are exactly the opposite of mine,” Conseilreplied. “He has a practical mind and a demanding stomach. He’s tiredof staring at fish and eating them day in and day out. This shortageof wine, bread, and meat isn’t suitable for an upstanding Anglo-Saxon,a man accustomed to beefsteak and unfazed by regular doses of brandyor gin!”“For my part, Conseil, that doesn’t bother me in the least, and I’veadjusted very nicely to the diet on board.”“So have I,” Conseil replied. “Accordingly, I think as much aboutstaying as Mr. Land about making his escape. Thus, if this new yearisn’t a happy one for me, it will be for him, and vice versa. Nomatter what happens, one of us will be pleased. So, in conclusion, Iwish master to have whatever his heart desires.”“Thank you, Conseil. Only I must ask you to postpone the question ofnew year’s gifts, and temporarily accept a hearty handshake in theirplace. That’s all I have on me.”“Master has never been more generous,” Conseil replied.And with that, the gallant lad went away.By January 2 we had fared 11,340 miles, hence 5,250 leagues, from ourstarting point in the seas of Japan. Before the Nautilus’s spur therestretched the dangerous waterways of the Coral Sea, off the northeastcoast of Australia. Our boat cruised along a few miles away from thatdaunting shoal where Captain Cook’s ships wellnigh miscarried on June10, 1770. The craft that Cook was aboard charged into some coral rock,and if his vessel didn’t go down, it was thanks to the circumstancethat a piece of coral broke off in the collision and plugged the veryhole it had made in the hull.I would have been deeply interested in visiting this long, 360-leaguereef, against which the ever-surging sea broke with the fearsomeintensity of thunderclaps. But just then the Nautilus’s slanting finstook us to great depths, and I could see nothing of those high coralwalls. I had to rest content with the various specimens of fishbrought up by our nets. Among others I noted some long-finnedalbacore, a species in the genus Scomber, as big as tuna, bluish onthe flanks, and streaked with crosswise stripes that disappear whenthe animal dies. These fish followed us in schools and supplied ourtable with very dainty flesh. We also caught a large number ofyellow-green gilthead, half a decimeter long and tasting like dorado,plus some flying gurnards, authentic underwater swallows that, on darknights, alternately streak air and water with their phosphorescentglimmers. Among mollusks and zoophytes, I found in our trawl’s meshesvarious species of alcyonarian coral, sea urchins, hammer shells,spurred-star shells, wentletrap snails, horn shells, glass snails. Thelocal flora was represented by fine floating algae: sea tangle, andkelp from the genus Macrocystis, saturated with the mucilage theirpores perspire, from which I selected a wonderful Nemastomageliniaroidea, classifying it with the natural curiosities in themuseum.On January 4, two days after crossing the Coral Sea, we raised thecoast of Papua. On this occasion Captain Nemo told me that he intendedto reach the Indian Ocean via the Torres Strait. This was the extentof his remarks. Ned saw with pleasure that this course would bring us,once again, closer to European seas.The Torres Strait is regarded as no less dangerous for its bristlingreefs than for the savage inhabitants of its coasts. It separatesQueensland from the huge island of Papua, also called New Guinea.Papua is 400 leagues long by 130 leagues wide, with a surface area of40,000 geographic leagues. It’s located between latitude 0 degrees 19’and 10 degrees 2’ south, and between longitude 128 degrees 23’ and 146degrees 15’. At noon, while the chief officer was taking the sun’saltitude, I spotted the summits of the Arfak Mountains, rising interraces and ending in sharp peaks.Discovered in 1511 by the Portuguese Francisco Serrano, these shoreswere successively visited by Don Jorge de Meneses in 1526, by Juan deGrijalva in 1527, by the Spanish general Alvaro de Saavedra in 1528,by Inigo Ortiz in 1545, by the Dutchman Schouten in 1616, by NicolasSruick in 1753, by Tasman, Dampier, Fumel, Carteret, Edwards,Bougainville, Cook, McClure, and Thomas Forrest, by Rear Admirald’Entrecasteaux in 1792, by Louis-Isidore Duperrey in 1823, and byCaptain Dumont d’Urville in 1827. “It’s the heartland of the blackswho occupy all Malaysia,” Mr. de Rienzi has said; and I hadn’t thefoggiest inkling that sailors’ luck was about to bring me face to facewith these daunting Andaman aborigines.So the Nautilus hove before the entrance to the world’s most dangerousstrait, a passageway that even the boldest navigators hesitated toclear: the strait that Luis Vaez de Torres faced on returning from theSouth Seas in Melanesia, the strait in which sloops of war underCaptain Dumont d’Urville ran aground in 1840 and nearly miscarriedwith all hands. And even the Nautilus, rising superior to every dangerin the sea, was about to become intimate with its coral reefs.The Torres Strait is about thirty-four leagues wide, but it’sobstructed by an incalculable number of islands, islets, breakers, androcks that make it nearly impossible to navigate. Consequently,Captain Nemo took every desired precaution in crossing it. Floatingflush with the water, the Nautilus moved ahead at a moderatepace. Like a cetacean’s tail, its propeller churned the waves slowly.Taking advantage of this situation, my two companions and I foundseats on the ever-deserted platform. In front of us stood thepilothouse, and unless I’m extremely mistaken, Captain Nemo must havebeen inside, steering his Nautilus himself.Under my eyes I had the excellent charts of the Torres Strait that hadbeen surveyed and drawn up by the hydrographic engineer VincendonDumoulin and Sublieutenant (now Admiral) Coupvent-Desbois, who werepart of Dumont d’Urville’s general staff during his final voyage tocircumnavigate the globe. These, along with the efforts of CaptainKing, are the best charts for untangling the snarl of this narrowpassageway, and I consulted them with scrupulous care.Around the Nautilus the sea was boiling furiously. A stream of waves,bearing from southeast to northwest at a speed of two and a half milesper hour, broke over heads of coral emerging here and there.“That’s one rough sea!” Ned Land told me.“Abominable indeed,” I replied, “and hardly suitable for a craft likethe Nautilus.”“That damned captain,” the Canadian went on, “must really be sure ofhis course, because if these clumps of coral so much as brush us,they’ll rip our hull into a thousand pieces!”The situation was indeed dangerous, but as if by magic, the Nautilusseemed to glide right down the middle of these rampaging reefs. Itdidn’t follow the exact course of the Zealous and the new Astrolabe,which had proved so ill-fated for Captain Dumont d’Urville. It wentmore to the north, hugged the Murray Islands, and returned to thesouthwest near Cumberland Passage. I thought it was about to chargewholeheartedly into this opening, but it went up to the northwest,through a large number of little-known islands and islets, and steeredtoward Tound Island and the Bad Channel.I was already wondering if Captain Nemo, rash to the point of sheerinsanity, wanted his ship to tackle the narrows where Dumontd’Urville’s two sloops of war had gone aground, when he changeddirection a second time and cut straight to the west, heading towardGueboroa Island.By then it was three o’clock in the afternoon. The current wasslacking off, it was almost full tide. The Nautilus drew near thisisland, which I can see to this day with its remarkable fringe ofscrew pines. We hugged it from less than two miles out.A sudden jolt threw me down. The Nautilus had just struck a reef, andit remained motionless, listing slightly to port.When I stood up, I saw Captain Nemo and his chief officer on theplatform. They were examining the ship’s circumstances, exchanging afew words in their incomprehensible dialect.Here is what those circumstances entailed. Two miles to starboard layGueboroa Island, its coastline curving north to west like an immensearm. To the south and east, heads of coral were already on display,left uncovered by the ebbing waters. We had run aground at full tideand in one of those seas whose tides are moderate, an inconvenientstate of affairs for floating the Nautilus off. However, the shiphadn’t suffered in any way, so solidly joined was its hull. Butalthough it could neither sink nor split open, it was in seriousdanger of being permanently attached to these reefs, and that wouldhave been the finish of Captain Nemo’s submersible.I was mulling this over when the captain approached, cool and calm,forever in control of himself, looking neither alarmed nor annoyed.“An accident?” I said to him.“No, an incident,” he answered me.“But an incident,” I replied, “that may oblige you to become aresident again of these shores you avoid!”Captain Nemo gave me an odd look and gestured no. Which told me prettyclearly that nothing would ever force him to set foot on a land massagain. Then he said:“No, Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus isn’t consigned to perdition. Itwill still carry you through the midst of the ocean’s wonders. Ourvoyage is just beginning, and I’ve no desire to deprive myself so soonof the pleasure of your company.”“Even so, Captain Nemo,” I went on, ignoring his ironic turn ofphrase, “the Nautilus has run aground at a moment when the sea isfull. Now then, the tides aren’t strong in the Pacific, and if youcan’t unballast the Nautilus, which seems impossible to me, I don’tsee how it will float off.”“You’re right, professor, the Pacific tides aren’t strong,” CaptainNemo replied. “But in the Torres Strait, one still finds ameter-and-a-half difference in level between high and low seas. Todayis January 4, and in five days the moon will be full. Now then, I’llbe quite astonished if that good-natured satellite doesn’tsufficiently raise these masses of water and do me a favor for whichI’ll be forever grateful.”This said, Captain Nemo went below again to the Nautilus’s interior,followed by his chief officer. As for our craft, it no longer stirred,staying as motionless as if these coral polyps had already walled itin with their indestructible cement.“Well, sir?” Ned Land said to me, coming up after the captain’sdeparture.“Well, Ned my friend, we’ll serenely wait for the tide on the 9th,because it seems the moon will have the good nature to float us away!”“As simple as that?”“As simple as that.”“So our captain isn’t going to drop his anchors, put his engines onthe chains, and do anything to haul us off?”“Since the tide will be sufficient,” Conseil replied simply.The Canadian stared at Conseil, then he shrugged his shoulders. Theseaman in him was talking now.“Sir,” he answered, “you can trust me when I say this hunk of ironwill never navigate again, on the seas or under them. It’s only fit tobe sold for its weight. So I think it’s time we gave Captain Nemo theslip.”“Ned my friend,” I replied, “unlike you, I haven’t given up on ourvaliant Nautilus, and in four days we’ll know where we stand on thesePacific tides. Besides, an escape attempt might be timely if we werein sight of the coasts of England or Provence, but in the waterways ofPapua it’s another story. And we’ll always have that as a last resortif the Nautilus doesn’t right itself, which I’d regard as a realcalamity.”“But couldn’t we at least get the lay of the land?” Ned wenton. “Here’s an island. On this island there are trees. Under thosetrees land animals loaded with cutlets and roast beef, which I’d behappy to sink my teeth into.”“In this instance our friend Ned is right,” Conseil said, “and I sidewith his views. Couldn’t master persuade his friend Captain Nemo tosend the three of us ashore, if only so our feet don’t lose the knackof treading on the solid parts of our planet?”“I can ask him,” I replied, “but he’ll refuse.”“Let master take the risk,” Conseil said, “and we’ll know where westand on the captain’s affability.”Much to my surprise, Captain Nemo gave me the permission I asked for,and he did so with grace and alacrity, not even exacting my promise toreturn on board. But fleeing across the New Guinea territories wouldbe extremely dangerous, and I wouldn’t have advised Ned Land to tryit. Better to be prisoners aboard the Nautilus than to fall into thehands of Papuan natives.The skiff was put at our disposal for the next morning. I hardlyneeded to ask whether Captain Nemo would be coming along. I likewiseassumed that no crewmen would be assigned to us, that Ned Land wouldbe in sole charge of piloting the longboat. Besides, the shore lay nomore than two miles off, and it would be child’s play for the Canadianto guide that nimble skiff through those rows of reefs so ill-fatedfor big ships.The next day, January 5, after its deck paneling was opened, the skiffwas wrenched from its socket and launched to sea from the top of theplatform. Two men were sufficient for this operation. The oars wereinside the longboat and we had only to take our seats.At eight o’clock, armed with rifles and axes, we pulled clear of theNautilus. The sea was fairly calm. A mild breeze blew from shore. Inplace by the oars, Conseil and I rowed vigorously, and Ned steered usinto the narrow lanes between the breakers. The skiff handled easilyand sped swiftly.Ned Land couldn’t conceal his glee. He was a prisoner escaping fromprison and never dreaming he would need to reenter it.“Meat!” he kept repeating. “Now we’ll eat red meat! Actual game! Areal mess call, by thunder! I’m not saying fish aren’t good for you,but we mustn’t overdo ’em, and a slice of fresh venison grilled overlive coals will be a nice change from our standard fare.”“You glutton,” Conseil replied, “you’re making my mouth water!”“It remains to be seen,” I said, “whether these forests do containgame, and if the types of game aren’t of such size that they can huntthe hunter.”“Fine, Professor Aronnax!” replied the Canadian, whose teeth seemed tobe as honed as the edge of an ax. “But if there’s no other quadrupedon this island, I’ll eat tiger—tiger sirloin.”“Our friend Ned grows disturbing,” Conseil replied.“Whatever it is,” Ned Land went on, “any animal having four feetwithout feathers, or two feet with feathers, will be greeted by myvery own one-gun salute.”“Oh good!” I replied. “The reckless Mr. Land is at it again!”“Don’t worry, Professor Aronnax, just keep rowing!” the Canadianreplied. “I only need twenty-five minutes to serve you one of my ownspecial creations.”By 8:30 the Nautilus’s skiff had just run gently aground on a sandystrand, after successfully clearing the ring of coral that surroundsGueboroa Island.CHAPTER 21Some Days AshoreSTEPPING ASHORE had an exhilarating effect on me. Ned Land tested thesoil with his foot, as if he were laying claim to it. Yet it had beenonly two months since we had become, as Captain Nemo expressed it,“passengers on the Nautilus,” in other words, the literal prisoners ofits commander.In a few minutes we were a gunshot away from the coast. The soil wasalmost entirely madreporic, but certain dry stream beds were strewnwith granite rubble, proving that this island was of primordialorigin. The entire horizon was hidden behind a curtain of wonderfulforests. Enormous trees, sometimes as high as 200 feet, were linked toeach other by garlands of tropical creepers, genuine natural hammocksthat swayed in a mild breeze. There were mimosas, banyan trees,beefwood, teakwood, hibiscus, screw pines, palm trees, all mingling inwild profusion; and beneath the shade of their green canopies, at thefeet of their gigantic trunks, there grew orchids, leguminous plants,and ferns.Meanwhile, ignoring all these fine specimens of Papuan flora, theCanadian passed up the decorative in favor of the functional. Hespotted a coconut palm, beat down some of its fruit, broke them open,and we drank their milk and ate their meat with a pleasure that was aprotest against our standard fare on the Nautilus.“Excellent!” Ned Land said.“Exquisite!” Conseil replied.“And I don’t think,” the Canadian said, “that your Nemo would objectto us stashing a cargo of coconuts aboard his vessel?”“I imagine not,” I replied, “but he won’t want to sample them.”“Too bad for him!” Conseil said.“And plenty good for us!” Ned Land shot back. “There’ll be more leftover!”“A word of caution, Mr. Land,” I told the harpooner, who was about toravage another coconut palm. “Coconuts are admirable things, butbefore we stuff the skiff with them, it would be wise to find outwhether this island offers other substances just as useful. Some freshvegetables would be well received in the Nautilus’s pantry.”“Master is right,” Conseil replied, “and I propose that we set asidethree places in our longboat: one for fruit, another for vegetables,and a third for venison, of which I still haven’t glimpsed the tiniestspecimen.”“Don’t give up so easily, Conseil,” the Canadian replied.“So let’s continue our excursion,” I went on, “but keep a sharplookout. This island seems uninhabited, but it still might harborcertain individuals who aren’t so finicky about the sort of game theyeat!”“Hee hee!” Ned put in, with a meaningful movement of his jaws.“Ned! Oh horrors!” Conseil exclaimed.“Ye gods,” the Canadian shot back, “I’m starting to appreciate thecharms of cannibalism!”“Ned, Ned! Don’t say that!” Conseil answered. “You a cannibal? Why,I’ll no longer be safe next to you, I who share your cabin! Does thismean I’ll wake up half devoured one fine day?”“I’m awfully fond of you, Conseil my friend, but not enough to eat youwhen there’s better food around.”“Then I daren’t delay,” Conseil replied. “The hunt is on! Weabsolutely must bag some game to placate this man-eater, or one ofthese mornings master won’t find enough pieces of his manservant toserve him.”While exchanging this chitchat, we entered beneath the dark canopiesof the forest, and for two hours we explored it in every direction.We couldn’t have been luckier in our search for edible vegetation, andsome of the most useful produce in the tropical zones supplied us witha valuable foodstuff missing on board.I mean the breadfruit tree, which is quite abundant on GueboroaIsland, and there I chiefly noted the seedless variety that inMalaysia is called “rima.”This tree is distinguished from other trees by a straight trunk fortyfeet high. To the naturalist’s eye, its gracefully rounded crown,formed of big multilobed leaves, was enough to denote the artocarpusthat has been so successfully transplanted to the Mascarene Islandseast ofMadagascar. From its mass of greenery, huge globular fruit stood out,a decimeter wide and furnished on the outside with creases thatassumed a hexangular pattern. It’s a handy plant that nature gives toregions lacking in wheat; without needing to be cultivated, it bearsfruit eight months out of the year.Ned Land was on familiar terms with this fruit. He had already eatenit on his many voyages and knew how to cook its edible substance. Sothe very sight of it aroused his appetite, and he couldn’t controlhimself.“Sir,” he told me, “I’ll die if I don’t sample a little breadfruitpasta!”“Sample some, Ned my friend, sample all you like. We’re here toconduct experiments, let’s conduct them.”“It won’t take a minute,” the Canadian replied.Equipped with a magnifying glass, he lit a fire of deadwood that wassoon crackling merrily. Meanwhile Conseil and I selected the finestartocarpus fruit. Some still weren’t ripe enough, and their thickskins covered white, slightly fibrous pulps. But a great many otherswere yellowish and gelatinous, just begging to be picked.This fruit contained no pits. Conseil brought a dozen of them to NedLand, who cut them into thick slices and placed them over a fire oflive coals, all the while repeating:“You’ll see, sir, how tasty this bread is!”“Especially since we’ve gone without baked goods for so long,” Conseilsaid.“It’s more than just bread,” the Canadian added. “It’s a daintypastry. You’ve never eaten any, sir?”“No, Ned.”“All right, get ready for something downright delectable! If you don’tcome back for seconds, I’m no longer the King of Harpooners!”After a few minutes, the parts of the fruit exposed to the fire werecompletely toasted. On the inside there appeared some white pasta, asort of soft bread center whose flavor reminded me of artichoke.This bread was excellent, I must admit, and I ate it with greatpleasure.“Unfortunately,” I said, “this pasta won’t stay fresh, so it seemspointless to make a supply for on board.”“By thunder, sir!” Ned Land exclaimed. “There you go, talking like anaturalist, but meantime I’ll be acting like a baker! Conseil, harvestsome of this fruit to take with us when we go back.”“And how will you prepare it?” I asked the Canadian.“I’ll make a fermented batter from its pulp that’ll keep indefinitelywithout spoiling. When I want some, I’ll just cook it in the galley onboard—it’ll have a slightly tart flavor, but you’ll find itexcellent.”“So, Mr. Ned, I see that this bread is all we need—”“Not quite, professor,” the Canadian replied. “We need some fruit togo with it, or at least some vegetables.”“Then let’s look for fruit and vegetables.”When our breadfruit harvesting was done, we took to the trail tocomplete this “dry-land dinner.”We didn’t search in vain, and near noontime we had an ample supply ofbananas. This delicious produce from the Torrid Zones ripens all yearround, and Malaysians, who give them the name “pisang,” eat themwithout bothering to cook them. In addition to bananas, we gatheredsome enormous jackfruit with a very tangy flavor, some tasty mangoes,and some pineapples of unbelievable size. But this foraging took up agood deal of our time, which, even so, we had no cause to regret.Conseil kept Ned under observation. The harpooner walked in the lead,and during his stroll through this forest, he gathered with sure handssome excellent fruit that should have completed his provisions.“So,” Conseil asked, “you have everything you need, Ned my friend?”“Humph!” the Canadian put in.“What! You’re complaining?”“All this vegetation doesn’t make a meal,” Ned replied. “Just sidedishes, dessert. But where’s the soup course? Where’s the roast?”“Right,” I said. “Ned promised us cutlets, which seems highlyquestionable to me.”“Sir,” the Canadian replied, “our hunting not only isn’t over, ithasn’t even started. Patience! We’re sure to end up bumping into someanimal with either feathers or fur, if not in this locality, then inanother.”“And if not today, then tomorrow, because we mustn’t wander too faroff,” Conseil added. “That’s why I propose that we return to theskiff.”“What! Already!” Ned exclaimed.“We ought to be back before nightfall,” I said.“But what hour is it, then?” the Canadian asked.“Two o’clock at least,” Conseil replied.“How time flies on solid ground!” exclaimed Mr. Ned Land with a sighof regret.“Off we go!” Conseil replied.So we returned through the forest, and we completed our harvest bymaking a clean sweep of some palm cabbages that had to be picked fromthe crowns of their trees, some small beans that I recognized as the“abrou” of the Malaysians, and some high-quality yams.We were overloaded when we arrived at the skiff. However, Ned Landstill found these provisions inadequate. But fortune smiled onhim. Just as we were boarding, he spotted several trees twenty-five tothirty feet high, belonging to the palm species. As valuable as theartocarpus, these trees are justly ranked among the most usefulproduce in Malaysia.They were sago palms, vegetation that grows without being cultivated;like mulberry trees, they reproduce by means of shoots and seeds.Ned Land knew how to handle these trees. Taking his ax and wielding itwith great vigor, he soon stretched out on the ground two or threesago palms, whose maturity was revealed by the white dust sprinkledover their palm fronds.I watched him more as a naturalist than as a man in hunger. He beganby removing from each trunk an inch-thick strip of bark that covered anetwork of long, hopelessly tangled fibers that were puttied with asort of gummy flour. This flour was the starch-like sago, an ediblesubstance chiefly consumed by the Melanesian peoples.For the time being, Ned Land was content to chop these trunks intopieces, as if he were making firewood; later he would extract theflour by sifting it through cloth to separate it from its fibrousligaments, let it dry out in the sun, and leave it to harden insidemolds.Finally, at five o’clock in the afternoon, laden with all ourtreasures, we left the island beach and half an hour later pulledalongside the Nautilus. Nobody appeared on our arrival. The enormoussheet-iron cylinder seemed deserted. Our provisions loaded on board, Iwent below to my stateroom. There I found my supper ready. I ate andthen fell asleep.The next day, January 6: nothing new on board. Not a sound inside, nota sign of life. The skiff stayed alongside in the same place we hadleft it. We decided to return to Gueboroa Island. Ned Land hoped forbetter luck in his hunting than on the day before, and he wanted tovisit a different part of the forest.By sunrise we were off. Carried by an inbound current, the longboatreached the island in a matter of moments.We disembarked, and thinking it best to abide by the Canadian’sinstincts, we followed Ned Land, whose long legs threatened to outpaceus.Ned Land went westward up the coast; then, fording some stream beds,he reached open plains that were bordered by wonderful forests. Somekingfishers lurked along the watercourses, but they didn’t let usapproach. Their cautious behavior proved to me that these wingedcreatures knew where they stood on bipeds of our species, and Iconcluded that if this island wasn’t inhabited, at least human beingspaid it frequent visits.After crossing a pretty lush prairie, we arrived on the outskirts of asmall wood, enlivened by the singing and soaring of a large number ofbirds.“Still, they’re merely birds,” Conseil said.“But some are edible,” the harpooner replied.“Wrong, Ned my friend,” Conseil answered, “because I see only ordinaryparrots here.”“Conseil my friend,” Ned replied in all seriousness, “parrots are likepheasant to people with nothing else on their plates.”“And I might add,” I said, “that when these birds are properly cooked,they’re at least worth a stab of the fork.”Indeed, under the dense foliage of this wood, a whole host of parrotsfluttered from branch to branch, needing only the proper upbringing tospeak human dialects. At present they were cackling in chorus withparakeets of every color, with solemn cockatoos that seemed to bepondering some philosophical problem, while bright red lories passedby like pieces of bunting borne on the breeze, in the midst of kalaoparrots raucously on the wing, Papuan lories painted the subtlestshades of azure, and a whole variety of delightful winged creatures,none terribly edible.However, one bird unique to these shores, which never passes beyondthe boundaries of the Aru and Papuan Islands, was missing from thiscollection. But I was given a chance to marvel at it soon enough.After crossing through a moderately dense thicket, we again found someplains obstructed by bushes. There I saw some magnificent birdssoaring aloft, the arrangement of their long feathers causing them tohead into the wind. Their undulating flight, the grace of their aerialcurves, and the play of their colors allured and delighted the eye. Ihad no trouble identifying them.“Birds of paradise!” I exclaimed.“Order Passeriforma, division Clystomora,” Conseil replied.“Partridge family?” Ned Land asked.“I doubt it, Mr. Land. Nevertheless, I’m counting on your dexterity tocatch me one of these delightful representatives of tropical nature!”“I’ll give it a try, professor, though I’m handier with a harpoon thana rifle.”Malaysians, who do a booming business in these birds with the Chinese,have various methods for catching them that we couldn’t use. Sometimesthey set snares on the tops of the tall trees that the bird ofparadise prefers to inhabit. At other times they capture it with atenacious glue that paralyzes its movements. They will even go so faras to poison the springs where these fowl habitually drink. But in ourcase, all we could do was fire at them on the wing, which left uslittle chance of getting one. And in truth, we used up a good part ofour ammunition in vain.Near eleven o’clock in the morning, we cleared the lower slopes of themountains that form the island’s center, and we still hadn’t bagged athing. Hunger spurred us on. The hunters had counted on consuming theproceeds of their hunting, and they had miscalculated. Luckily, andmuch to his surprise, Conseil pulled off a right-and-left shot andinsured our breakfast. He brought down a white pigeon and a ringdove,which were briskly plucked, hung from a spit, and roasted over ablazing fire of deadwood. While these fascinating animals werecooking, Ned prepared some bread from the artocarpus. Then the pigeonand ringdove were devoured to the bones and declaredexcellent. Nutmeg, on which these birds habitually gorge themselves,sweetens their flesh and makes it delicious eating.“They taste like chicken stuffed with truffles,” Conseil said.“All right, Ned,” I asked the Canadian, “now what do you need?”“Game with four paws, Professor Aronnax,” Ned Land replied. “All thesepigeons are only appetizers, snacks. So till I’ve bagged an animalwith cutlets, I won’t be happy!”“Nor I, Ned, until I’ve caught a bird of paradise.”“Then let’s keep hunting,” Conseil replied, “but while heading back tothe sea. We’ve arrived at the foothills of these mountains, and Ithink we’ll do better if we return to the forest regions.”It was good advice and we took it. After an hour’s walk we reached agenuine sago palm forest. A few harmless snakes fled underfoot. Birdsof paradise stole off at our approach, and I was in real despair ofcatching one when Conseil, walking in the lead, stooped suddenly, gavea triumphant shout, and came back to me, carrying a magnificent birdof paradise.“Oh bravo, Conseil!” I exclaimed.“Master is too kind,” Conseil replied.“Not at all, my boy. That was a stroke of genius, catching one ofthese live birds with your bare hands!”“If master will examine it closely, he’ll see that I deserve no greatpraise.”“And why not, Conseil?”“Because this bird is as drunk as a lord.”“Drunk?”“Yes, master, drunk from the nutmegs it was devouring under thatnutmeg tree where I caught it. See, Ned my friend, see the monstrousresults of intemperance!”“Damnation!” the Canadian shot back. “Considering the amount of ginI’ve had these past two months, you’ve got nothing to complain about!”Meanwhile I was examining this unusual bird. Conseil was notmistaken. Tipsy from that potent juice, our bird of paradise had beenreduced to helplessness. It was unable to fly. It was barely able towalk. But this didn’t alarm me, and I just let it sleep off itsnutmeg.This bird belonged to the finest of the eight species credited toPapua and its neighboring islands. It was a “great emerald,” one ofthe rarest birds of paradise. It measured three decimeters long. Itshead was comparatively small, and its eyes, placed near the opening ofits beak, were also small. But it offered a wonderful mixture of hues:a yellow beak, brown feet and claws, hazel wings with purple tips,pale yellow head and scruff of the neck, emerald throat, the belly andchest maroon to brown. Two strands, made of a horn substance coveredwith down, rose over its tail, which was lengthened by long, verylight feathers of wonderful fineness, and they completed the costumeof this marvelous bird that the islanders have poetically named “thesun bird.”How I wished I could take this superb bird of paradise back to Paris,to make a gift of it to the zoo at the Botanical Gardens, whichdoesn’t own a single live specimen.“So it must be a rarity or something?” the Canadian asked, in the toneof a hunter who, from the viewpoint of his art, gives the game apretty low rating.“A great rarity, my gallant comrade, and above all very hard tocapture alive. And even after they’re dead, there’s still a majormarket for these birds. So the natives have figured out how to createfake ones, like people create fake pearls or diamonds.”“What!” Conseil exclaimed. “They make counterfeit birds of paradise?”“Yes, Conseil.”“And is master familiar with how the islanders go about it?”“Perfectly familiar. During the easterly monsoon season, birds ofparadise lose the magnificent feathers around their tails thatnaturalists call ‘below-the-wing’ feathers. These feathers aregathered by the fowl forgers and skillfully fitted onto some poorpreviously mutilated parakeet. Then they paint over the suture,varnish the bird, and ship the fruits of their unique labors tomuseums and collectors in Europe.”“Good enough!” Ned Land put in. “If it isn’t the right bird, it’sstill the right feathers, and so long as the merchandise isn’t meantto be eaten, I see no great harm!”But if my desires were fulfilled by the capture of this bird ofparadise, those of our Canadian huntsman remainedunsatisfied. Luckily, near two o’clock Ned Land brought down amagnificent wild pig of the type the natives call “bari-outang.” Thisanimal came in the nick of time for us to bag some real quadrupedmeat, and it was warmly welcomed. Ned Land proved himself quitegloriously with his gunshot. Hit by an electric bullet, the pigdropped dead on the spot.The Canadian properly skinned and cleaned it, after removing half adozen cutlets destined to serve as the grilled meat course of ourevening meal. Then the hunt was on again, and once more would bemarked by the exploits of Ned and Conseil.In essence, beating the bushes, the two friends flushed a herd ofkangaroos that fled by bounding away on their elastic paws. But theseanimals didn’t flee so swiftly that our electric capsules couldn’tcatch up with them.“Oh, professor!” shouted Ned Land, whose hunting fever had gone to hisbrain. “What excellent game, especially in a stew! What a supply forthe Nautilus! Two, three, five down! And just think how we’ll devourall this meat ourselves, while those numbskulls on board won’t get ashred!”In his uncontrollable glee, I think the Canadian might haveslaughtered the whole horde, if he hadn’t been so busy talking! But hewas content with a dozen of these fascinating marsupials, which makeup the first order of aplacental mammals, as Conseil just had to tellus.These animals were small in stature. They were a species of those“rabbit kangaroos” that usually dwell in the hollows of trees and aretremendously fast; but although of moderate dimensions, they at leastfurnish a meat that’s highly prized.We were thoroughly satisfied with the results of our hunting. Agleeful Ned proposed that we return the next day to this magic island,which he planned to depopulate of its every edible quadruped. But hewas reckoning without events.By six o’clock in the evening, we were back on the beach. The skiffwas aground in its usual place. The Nautilus, looking like a longreef, emerged from the waves two miles offshore.Without further ado, Ned Land got down to the important business ofdinner. He came wonderfully to terms with its entire cooking. Grillingover the coals, those cutlets from the “bari-outang” soon gave off asucculent aroma that perfumed the air.But I catch myself following in the Canadian’s footsteps. Look atme—in ecstasy over freshly grilled pork! Please grant me a pardon asI’ve already granted one to Mr. Land, and on the same grounds!In short, dinner was excellent. Two ringdoves rounded out thisextraordinary menu. Sago pasta, bread from the artocarpus, mangoes,half a dozen pineapples, and the fermented liquor from certaincoconuts heightened our glee. I suspect that my two fine companionsweren’t quite as clearheaded as one could wish.“What if we don’t return to the Nautilus this evening?” Conseil said.“What if we never return to it?” Ned Land added.Just then a stone whizzed toward us, landed at our feet, and cut shortthe harpooner’s proposition.CHAPTER 22The Lightning Bolts of Captain NemoWITHOUT STANDING UP, we stared in the direction of the forest, my handstopping halfway to my mouth, Ned Land’s completing its assignment.“Stones don’t fall from the sky,” Conseil said, “or else they deserveto be called meteorites.”A second well-polished stone removed a tasty ringdove leg fromConseil’s hand, giving still greater relevance to his observation.We all three stood up, rifles to our shoulders, ready to answer anyattack.“Apes maybe?” Ned Land exclaimed.“Nearly,” Conseil replied. “Savages.”“Head for the skiff!” I said, moving toward the sea.Indeed, it was essential to beat a retreat because some twentynatives, armed with bows and slings, appeared barely a hundred pacesoff, on the outskirts of a thicket that masked the horizon to ourright.The skiff was aground ten fathoms away from us.The savages approached without running, but they favored us with ashow of the greatest hostility. It was raining stones and arrows.Ned Land was unwilling to leave his provisions behind, and despite theimpending danger, he clutched his pig on one side, his kangaroos onthe other, and scampered off with respectable speed.In two minutes we were on the strand. Loading provisions and weaponsinto the skiff, pushing it to sea, and positioning its two oars werethe work of an instant. We hadn’t gone two cable lengths when ahundred savages, howling and gesticulating, entered the water up totheir waists. I looked to see if their appearance might draw some ofthe Nautilus’s men onto the platform. But no. Lying well out, thatenormous machine still seemed completely deserted.Twenty minutes later we boarded ship. The hatches were open. Aftermooring the skiff, we reentered the Nautilus’s interior.I went below to the lounge, from which some chords werewafting. Captain Nemo was there, leaning over the organ, deep in amusical trance.“Captain!” I said to him.He didn’t hear me.“Captain!” I went on, touching him with my hand.He trembled, and turning around:“Ah, it’s you, professor!” he said to me. “Well, did you have a happyhunt? Was your herb gathering a success?”“Yes, captain,” I replied, “but unfortunately we’ve brought back ahorde of bipeds whose proximity worries me.”“What sort of bipeds?”“Savages.”“Savages!” Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone. “You set foot onone of the shores of this globe, professor, and you’re surprised tofind savages there? Where aren’t there savages? And besides, are theyany worse than men elsewhere, these people you call savages?”“But captain—”“Speaking for myself, sir, I’ve encountered them everywhere.”“Well then,” I replied, “if you don’t want to welcome them aboard theNautilus, you’d better take some precautions!”“Easy, professor, no cause for alarm.”“But there are a large number of these natives.”“What’s your count?”“At least a hundred.”“Professor Aronnax,” replied Captain Nemo, whose fingers took theirplaces again on the organ keys, “if every islander in Papua were togather on that beach, the Nautilus would still have nothing to fearfrom their attacks!”The captain’s fingers then ran over the instrument’s keyboard, and Inoticed that he touched only its black keys, which gave his melodies abasically Scottish color. Soon he had forgotten my presence and waslost in a reverie that I no longer tried to dispel.I climbed onto the platform. Night had already fallen, because in thislow latitude the sun sets quickly, without any twilight. I could seeGueboroa Island only dimly. But numerous fires had been kindled on thebeach, attesting that the natives had no thoughts of leaving it.For several hours I was left to myself, sometimes musing on theislanders—but no longer fearing them because the captain’s unflappableconfidence had won me over—and sometimes forgetting them to marvel atthe splendors of this tropical night. My memories took wing towardFrance, in the wake of those zodiacal stars due to twinkle over it ina few hours. The moon shone in the midst of the constellations attheir zenith. I then remembered that this loyal, good-naturedsatellite would return to this same place the day after tomorrow, toraise the tide and tear the Nautilus from its coral bed. Nearmidnight, seeing that all was quiet over the darkened waves as well asunder the waterside trees, I repaired to my cabin and fell into apeaceful sleep.The night passed without mishap. No doubt the Papuans had beenfrightened off by the mere sight of this monster aground in the bay,because our hatches stayed open, offering easy access to theNautilus’s interior.At six o’clock in the morning, January 8, I climbed onto theplatform. The morning shadows were lifting. The island was soon onview through the dissolving mists, first its beaches, then itssummits.The islanders were still there, in greater numbers than on the daybefore, perhaps 500 or 600 of them. Taking advantage of the low tide,some of them had moved forward over the heads of coral to within twocable lengths of the Nautilus. I could easily distinguish them. Theyobviously were true Papuans, men of fine stock, athletic in build,forehead high and broad, nose large but not flat, teeth white. Theirwoolly, red-tinted hair was in sharp contrast to their bodies, whichwere black and glistening like those of Nubians. Beneath theirpierced, distended earlobes there dangled strings of beads made frombone. Generally these savages were naked. I noted some women amongthem, dressed from hip to knee in grass skirts held up by belts madeof vegetation. Some of the chieftains adorned their necks withcrescents and with necklaces made from beads of red and whiteglass. Armed with bows, arrows, and shields, nearly all of themcarried from their shoulders a sort of net, which held those polishedstones their slings hurl with such dexterity.One of these chieftains came fairly close to the Nautilus, examiningit with care. He must have been a “mado” of high rank, because heparaded in a mat of banana leaves that had ragged edges and wasaccented with bright colors.I could easily have picked off this islander, he stood at such closerange; but I thought it best to wait for an actual show ofhostility. Between Europeans and savages, it’s acceptable forEuropeans to shoot back but not to attack first.During this whole time of low tide, the islanders lurked near theNautilus, but they weren’t boisterous. I often heard them repeat theword “assai,” and from their gestures I understood they were invitingme to go ashore, an invitation I felt obliged to decline.So the skiff didn’t leave shipside that day, much to the displeasureof Mr. Land who couldn’t complete his provisions. The adroit Canadianspent his time preparing the meat and flour products he had broughtfrom Gueboroa Island. As for the savages, they went back to shore neareleven o’clock in the morning, when the heads of coral began todisappear under the waves of the rising tide. But I saw their numbersswell considerably on the beach. It was likely that they had come fromneighboring islands or from the mainland of Papua proper. However, Ididn’t see one local dugout canoe.Having nothing better to do, I decided to dredge these beautiful,clear waters, which exhibited a profusion of shells, zoophytes, andopen-sea plants. Besides, it was the last day the Nautilus would spendin these waterways, if, tomorrow, it still floated off to the open seaas Captain Nemo had promised.So I summoned Conseil, who brought me a small, light dragnet similarto those used in oyster fishing.“What about these savages?” Conseil asked me. “With all due respect tomaster, they don’t strike me as very wicked!”“They’re cannibals even so, my boy.”“A person can be both a cannibal and a decent man,” Conseil replied,“just as a person can be both gluttonous and honorable. The onedoesn’t exclude the other.”“Fine, Conseil! And I agree that there are honorable cannibals whodecently devour their prisoners. However, I’m opposed to beingdevoured, even in all decency, so I’ll keep on my guard, especiallysince the Nautilus’s commander seems to be taking no precautions. Andnow let’s get to work!”For two hours our fishing proceeded energetically but without bringingup any rarities. Our dragnet was filled with Midas abalone, harpshells, obelisk snails, and especially the finest hammer shells I hadseen to that day. We also gathered in a few sea cucumbers, some pearloysters, and a dozen small turtles that we saved for the ship’spantry.But just when I least expected it, I laid my hands on a wonder, anatural deformity I’d have to call it, something very seldomencountered. Conseil had just made a cast of the dragnet, and his gearhad come back up loaded with a variety of fairly ordinary seashells,when suddenly he saw me plunge my arms swiftly into the net, pull outa shelled animal, and give a conchological yell, in other words, themost piercing yell a human throat can produce.“Eh? What happened to master?” Conseil asked, very startled. “Didmaster get bitten?”“No, my boy, but I’d gladly have sacrificed a finger for such a find!”“What find?”“This shell,” I said, displaying the subject of my triumph.“But that’s simply an olive shell of the ‘tent olive’ species, genusOliva, order Pectinibranchia, class Gastropoda, branch Mollusca—”“Yes, yes, Conseil! But instead of coiling from right to left, thisolive shell rolls from left to right!”“It can’t be!” Conseil exclaimed.“Yes, my boy, it’s a left-handed shell!”“A left-handed shell!” Conseil repeated, his heart pounding.“Look at its spiral!”“Oh, master can trust me on this,” Conseil said, taking the valuableshell in trembling hands, “but never have I felt such excitement!”And there was good reason to be excited! In fact, as naturalists haveventured to observe, “dextrality” is a well-known law of nature. Intheir rotational and orbital movements, stars and their satellites gofrom right to left. Man uses his right hand more often than his left,and consequently his various instruments and equipment (staircases,locks, watch springs, etc.) are designed to be used in a right-to-leftmanner. Now then, nature has generally obeyed this law in coiling hershells. They’re right-handed with only rare exceptions, and when bychance a shell’s spiral is left-handed, collectors will pay its weightin gold for it.So Conseil and I were deep in the contemplation of our treasure, and Iwas solemnly promising myself to enrich the Paris Museum with it, whenan ill-timed stone, hurled by one of the islanders, whizzed over andshattered the valuable object in Conseil’s hands.I gave a yell of despair! Conseil pounced on his rifle and aimed at asavage swinging a sling just ten meters away from him. I tried to stophim, but his shot went off and shattered a bracelet of amuletsdangling from the islander’s arm.“Conseil!” I shouted. “Conseil!”“Eh? What? Didn’t master see that this man-eater initiated theattack?”“A shell isn’t worth a human life!” I told him.“Oh, the rascal!” Conseil exclaimed. “I’d rather he cracked myshoulder!”Conseil was in dead earnest, but I didn’t subscribe to hisviews. However, the situation had changed in only a short time and wehadn’t noticed. Now some twenty dugout canoes were surrounding theNautilus. Hollowed from tree trunks, these dugouts were long, narrow,and well designed for speed, keeping their balance by means of twobamboo poles that floated on the surface of the water. They weremaneuvered by skillful, half-naked paddlers, and I viewed theiradvance with definite alarm.It was obvious these Papuans had already entered into relations withEuropeans and knew their ships. But this long, iron cylinder lying inthe bay, with no masts or funnels—what were they to make of it?Nothing good, because at first they kept it at a respectfuldistance. However, seeing that it stayed motionless, they regainedconfidence little by little and tried to become more familiar withit. Now then, it was precisely this familiarity that we needed toprevent. Since our weapons made no sound when they went off, theywould have only a moderate effect on these islanders, who reputedlyrespect nothing but noisy mechanisms. Without thunderclaps, lightningbolts would be much less frightening, although the danger lies in theflash, not the noise.Just then the dugout canoes drew nearer to the Nautilus, and a cloudof arrows burst over us.“Fire and brimstone, it’s hailing!” Conseil said. “And poisoned hailperhaps!”“We’ve got to alert Captain Nemo,” I said, reentering the hatch.I went below to the lounge. I found no one there. I ventured a knockat the door opening into the captain’s stateroom.The word “Enter!” answered me. I did so and found Captain Nemo busywith calculations in which there was no shortage of X and otheralgebraic signs.“Am I disturbing you?” I said out of politeness.“Correct, Professor Aronnax,” the captain answered me. “But I imagineyou have pressing reasons for looking me up?”“Very pressing. Native dugout canoes are surrounding us, and in a fewminutes we’re sure to be assaulted by several hundred savages.”“Ah!” Captain Nemo put in serenely. “They’ve come in their dugouts?”“Yes, sir.”“Well, sir, closing the hatches should do the trick.”“Precisely, and that’s what I came to tell you—”“Nothing easier,” Captain Nemo said.And he pressed an electric button, transmitting an order to the crew’squarters.“There, sir, all under control!” he told me after a few moments. “Theskiff is in place and the hatches are closed. I don’t imagine you’reworried that these gentlemen will stave in walls that shells from yourfrigate couldn’t breach?”“No, captain, but one danger still remains.”“What’s that, sir?”“Tomorrow at about this time, we’ll need to reopen the hatches torenew the Nautilus’s air.”“No argument, sir, since our craft breathes in the manner favored bycetaceans.”“But if these Papuans are occupying the platform at that moment, Idon’t see how you can prevent them from entering.”“Then, sir, you assume they’ll board the ship?”“I’m certain of it.”“Well, sir, let them come aboard. I see no reason to preventthem. Deep down they’re just poor devils, these Papuans, and I don’twant my visit to Gueboroa Island to cost the life of a single one ofthese unfortunate people!”On this note I was about to withdraw; but Captain Nemo detained me andinvited me to take a seat next to him. He questioned me with intereston our excursions ashore and on our hunting, but seemed not tounderstand the Canadian’s passionate craving for red meat. Then ourconversation skimmed various subjects, and without being moreforthcoming, Captain Nemo proved more affable.Among other things, we came to talk of the Nautilus’s circumstances,aground in the same strait where Captain Dumont d’Urville had nearlymiscarried. Then, pertinent to this:“He was one of your great seamen,” the captain told me, “one of yourshrewdest navigators, that d’Urville! He was the Frenchman’s CaptainCook. A man wise but unlucky! Braving the ice banks of the South Pole,the coral of Oceania, the cannibals of the Pacific, only to perishwretchedly in a train wreck! If that energetic man was able to thinkabout his life in its last seconds, imagine what his final thoughtsmust have been!”As he spoke, Captain Nemo seemed deeply moved, an emotion I felt wasto his credit.Then, chart in hand, we returned to the deeds of the French navigator:his voyages to circumnavigate the globe, his double attempt at theSouth Pole, which led to his discovery of the Adélie Coast and theLouis-Philippe Peninsula, finally his hydrographic surveys of thechief islands in Oceania.“What your d’Urville did on the surface of the sea,” Captain Nemo toldme, “I’ve done in the ocean’s interior, but more easily, morecompletely than he. Constantly tossed about by hurricanes, the Zealousand the new Astrolabe couldn’t compare with the Nautilus, a quiet workroom truly at rest in the midst of the waters!”“Even so, captain,” I said, “there is one major similarity betweenDumont d’Urville’s sloops of war and the Nautilus.”“What’s that, sir?”“Like them, the Nautilus has run aground!”“The Nautilus is not aground, sir,” Captain Nemo replied icily. “TheNautilus was built to rest on the ocean floor, and I don’t need toundertake the arduous labors, the maneuvers d’Urville had to attemptin order to float off his sloops of war. The Zealous and the newAstrolabe wellnigh perished, but my Nautilus is in nodanger. Tomorrow, on the day stated and at the hour stated, the tidewill peacefully lift it off, and it will resume its navigating throughthe seas.”“Captain,” I said, “I don’t doubt—”“Tomorrow,” Captain Nemo added, standing up, “tomorrow at 2:40 in theafternoon, the Nautilus will float off and exit the Torres Straitundamaged.”Pronouncing these words in an extremely sharp tone, Captain Nemo gaveme a curt bow. This was my dismissal, and I reentered my stateroom.There I found Conseil, who wanted to know the upshot of my interviewwith the captain.“My boy,” I replied, “when I expressed the belief that these Papuannatives were a threat to his Nautilus, the captain answered me withgreat irony. So I’ve just one thing to say to you: have faith in himand sleep in peace.”“Master has no need for my services?”“No, my friend. What’s Ned Land up to?”“Begging master’s indulgence,” Conseil replied, “but our friend Ned isconcocting a kangaroo pie that will be the eighth wonder!”I was left to myself; I went to bed but slept pretty poorly. I kepthearing noises from the savages, who were stamping on the platform andletting out deafening yells. The night passed in this way, without thecrew ever emerging from their usual inertia. They were no moredisturbed by the presence of these man-eaters than soldiers in anarmored fortress are troubled by ants running over the armor plate.I got up at six o’clock in the morning. The hatches weren’t open. Sothe air inside hadn’t been renewed; but the air tanks were kept fullfor any eventuality and would function appropriately to shoot a fewcubic meters of oxygen into the Nautilus’s thin atmosphere.I worked in my stateroom until noon without seeing Captain Nemo evenfor an instant. Nobody on board seemed to be making any preparationsfor departure.I still waited for a while, then I made my way to the main lounge. Itstimepiece marked 2:30. In ten minutes the tide would reach its maximumelevation, and if Captain Nemo hadn’t made a rash promise, theNautilus would immediately break free. If not, many months might passbefore it could leave its coral bed.But some preliminary vibrations could soon be felt over the boat’shull. I heard its plating grind against the limestone roughness ofthat coral base.At 2:35 Captain Nemo appeared in the lounge.“We’re about to depart,” he said.“Ah!” I put in.“I’ve given orders to open the hatches.”“What about the Papuans?”“What about them?” Captain Nemo replied, with a light shrug of hisshoulders.“Won’t they come inside the Nautilus?”“How will they manage that?”“By jumping down the hatches you’re about to open.”“Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo replied serenely, “the Nautilus’shatches aren’t to be entered in that fashion even when they’re open.”I gaped at the captain.“You don’t understand?” he said to me.“Not in the least.”“Well, come along and you’ll see!”I headed to the central companionway. There, very puzzled, Ned Landand Conseil watched the crewmen opening the hatches, while a frightfulclamor and furious shouts resounded outside.The hatch lids fell back onto the outer plating. Twenty horrible facesappeared. But when the first islander laid hands on the companionwayrailing, he was flung backward by some invisible power, lord knowswhat! He ran off, howling in terror and wildly prancing around.Ten of his companions followed him. All ten met the same fate.Conseil was in ecstasy. Carried away by his violent instincts, NedLand leaped up the companionway. But as soon as his hands seized therailing, he was thrown backward in his turn.“Damnation!” he exclaimed. “I’ve been struck by a lightning bolt!”These words explained everything to me. It wasn’t just a railing thatled to the platform, it was a metal cable fully charged with theship’s electricity. Anyone who touched it got a fearsome shock—andsuch a shock would have been fatal if Captain Nemo had thrown the fullcurrent from his equipment into this conducting cable! It couldhonestly be said that he had stretched between himself and hisassailants a network of electricity no one could clear with impunity.Meanwhile, crazed with terror, the unhinged Papuans beat a retreat. Asfor us, half laughing, we massaged and comforted poor Ned Land, whowas swearing like one possessed.But just then, lifted off by the tide’s final undulations, theNautilus left its coral bed at exactly that fortieth minute pinpointedby the captain. Its propeller churned the waves with lazymajesty. Gathering speed little by little, the ship navigated on thesurface of the ocean, and safe and sound, it left behind the dangerousnarrows of the Torres Strait.CHAPTER 23“Aegri Somnia”**Latin: “troubled dreams.” Ed.THE FOLLOWING DAY, January 10, the Nautilus resumed its travels inmidwater but at a remarkable speed that I estimated to be at leastthirty-five miles per hour. The propeller was going so fast I couldneither follow nor count its revolutions.I thought about how this marvelous electric force not only gavemotion, heat, and light to the Nautilus but even protected it againstoutside attack, transforming it into a sacred ark no profane handcould touch without being blasted; my wonderment was boundless, and itwent from the submersible itself to the engineer who had created it.We were traveling due west and on January 11 we doubled Cape Wessel,located in longitude 135 degrees and latitude 10 degrees north, thewestern tip of the Gulf of Carpentaria. Reefs were still numerous butmore widely scattered and were fixed on the chart with the greatestaccuracy. The Nautilus easily avoided the Money breakers to port andthe Victoria reefs to starboard, positioned at longitude 130 degreeson the tenth parallel, which we went along rigorously.On January 13, arriving in the Timor Sea, Captain Nemo raised theisland of that name at longitude 122 degrees. This island, whosesurface area measures 1,625 square leagues, is governed byrajahs. These aristocrats deem themselves the sons of crocodiles, inother words, descendants with the most exalted origins to which ahuman being can lay claim. Accordingly, their scaly ancestors infestthe island’s rivers and are the subjects of special veneration. Theyare sheltered, nurtured, flattered, pampered, and offered a ritualdiet of nubile maidens; and woe to the foreigner who lifts a fingeragainst these sacred saurians.But the Nautilus wanted nothing to do with these nasty animals. TimorIsland was visible for barely an instant at noon while the chiefofficer determined his position. I also caught only a glimpse oflittle Roti Island, part of this same group, whose women have awell-established reputation for beauty in the Malaysian marketplace.After our position fix, the Nautilus’s latitude bearings weremodulated to the southwest. Our prow pointed to the IndianOcean. Where would Captain Nemo’s fancies take us? Would he head up tothe shores of Asia? Would he pull nearer to the beaches of Europe?Unlikely choices for a man who avoided populated areas! So would he godown south? Would he double the Cape of Good Hope, then Cape Horn, andpush on to the Antarctic pole? Finally, would he return to the seas ofthe Pacific, where his Nautilus could navigate freely and easily? Timewould tell.After cruising along the Cartier, Hibernia, Seringapatam, and Scottreefs, the solid element’s last exertions against the liquid element,we were beyond all sight of shore by January 14. The Nautilus sloweddown in an odd manner, and very unpredictable in its ways, itsometimes swam in the midst of the waters, sometimes drifted on theirsurface.During this phase of our voyage, Captain Nemo conducted interestingexperiments on the different temperatures in various strata of thesea. Under ordinary conditions, such readings are obtained using somepretty complicated instruments whose findings are dubious to say theleast, whether they’re thermometric sounding lines, whose glass oftenshatters under the water’s pressure, or those devices based on thevarying resistance of metals to electric currents. The results soobtained can’t be adequately double-checked. By contrast, Captain Nemowould seek the sea’s temperature by going himself into its depths, andwhen he placed his thermometer in contact with the various layers ofliquid, he found the sought-for degree immediately and with certainty.And so, by loading up its ballast tanks, or by sinking obliquely withits slanting fins, the Nautilus successively reached depths of 3,000,4,000, 5,000, 7,000, 9,000, and 10,000 meters, and the ultimateconclusion from these experiments was that, in all latitudes, the seahad a permanent temperature of 4.5 degrees centigrade at a depth of1,000 meters.I watched these experiments with the most intense fascination. CaptainNemo brought a real passion to them. I often wondered why he tookthese observations. Were they for the benefit of his fellow man? Itwas unlikely, because sooner or later his work would perish with himin some unknown sea! Unless he intended the results of his experimentsfor me. But that meant this strange voyage of mine would come to anend, and no such end was in sight.Be that as it may, Captain Nemo also introduced me to the differentdata he had obtained on the relative densities of the water in ourglobe’s chief seas. From this news I derived some personalenlightenment having nothing to do with science.It happened the morning of January 15. The captain, with whom I wasstrolling on the platform, asked me if I knew how salt water differsin density from sea to sea. I said no, adding that there was a lack ofrigorous scientific observations on this subject.“I’ve taken such observations,” he told me, “and I can vouch for theirreliability.”“Fine,” I replied, “but the Nautilus lives in a separate world, andthe secrets of its scientists don’t make their way ashore.”“You’re right, professor,” he told me after a few moments ofsilence. “This is a separate world. It’s as alien to the earth as theplanets accompanying our globe around the sun, and we’ll never becomefamiliar with the work of scientists on Saturn or Jupiter. But sincefate has linked our two lives, I can reveal the results of myobservations to you.”“I’m all attention, captain.”“You’re aware, professor, that salt water is denser than fresh water,but this density isn’t uniform. In essence, if I represent the densityof fresh water by 1.000, then I find 1.028 for the waters of theAtlantic, 1.026 for the waters of the Pacific, 1.030 for the waters ofthe Mediterranean—”Aha, I thought, so he ventures into the Mediterranean?“—1.018 for the waters of the Ionian Sea, and 1.029 for the waters ofthe Adriatic.”Assuredly, the Nautilus didn’t avoid the heavily traveled seas ofEurope, and from this insight I concluded that the ship would take usback—perhaps very soon—to more civilized shores. I expected Ned Landto greet this news with unfeigned satisfaction.For several days our work hours were spent in all sorts ofexperiments, on the degree of salinity in waters of different depths,or on their electric properties, coloration, and transparency, and inevery instance Captain Nemo displayed an ingenuity equaled only by hisgraciousness toward me. Then I saw no more of him for some days andagain lived on board in seclusion.On January 16 the Nautilus seemed to have fallen asleep just a fewmeters beneath the surface of the water. Its electric equipment hadbeen turned off, and the motionless propeller let it ride with thewaves. I assumed that the crew were busy with interior repairs,required by the engine’s strenuous mechanical action.My companions and I then witnessed an unusual sight. The panels in thelounge were open, and since the Nautilus’s beacon was off, a hazydarkness reigned in the midst of the waters. Covered with heavyclouds, the stormy sky gave only the faintest light to the ocean’supper strata.I was observing the state of the sea under these conditions, and eventhe largest fish were nothing more than ill-defined shadows, when theNautilus was suddenly transferred into broad daylight. At first Ithought the beacon had gone back on and was casting its electric lightinto the liquid mass. I was mistaken, and after a hasty examination Idiscovered my error.The Nautilus had drifted into the midst of some phosphorescent strata,which, in this darkness, came off as positively dazzling. This effectwas caused by myriads of tiny, luminous animals whose brightnessincreased when they glided over the metal hull of our submersible. Inthe midst of these luminous sheets of water, I then glimpsed flashesof light, like those seen inside a blazing furnace from streams ofmolten lead or from masses of metal brought to a white heat—flashes sointense that certain areas of the light became shadows by comparison,in a fiery setting from which every shadow should seemingly have beenbanished. No, this was no longer the calm emission of our usuallighting! This light throbbed with unprecedented vigor and activity!You sensed that it was alive!In essence, it was a cluster of countless open-sea infusoria, ofnoctiluca an eighth of an inch wide, actual globules of transparentjelly equipped with a threadlike tentacle, up to 25,000 of which havebeen counted in thirty cubic centimeters of water. And the power oftheir light was increased by those glimmers unique to medusas,starfish, common jellyfish, angel-wing clams, and other phosphorescentzoophytes, which were saturated with grease from organic matterdecomposed by the sea, and perhaps with mucus secreted by fish.For several hours the Nautilus drifted in this brilliant tide, and ourwonderment grew when we saw huge marine animals cavorting in it, likethe fire-dwelling salamanders of myth. In the midst of these flamesthat didn’t burn, I could see swift, elegant porpoises, the tirelesspranksters of the seas, and sailfish three meters long, those shrewdheralds of hurricanes, whose fearsome broadswords sometimes bangedagainst the lounge window. Then smaller fish appeared: miscellaneoustriggerfish, leather jacks, unicornfish, and a hundred others thatleft stripes on this luminous atmosphere in their course.Some magic lay behind this dazzling sight! Perhaps some atmosphericcondition had intensified this phenomenon? Perhaps a storm had beenunleashed on the surface of the waves? But only a few meters down, theNautilus felt no tempest’s fury, and the ship rocked peacefully in themidst of the calm waters.And so it went, some new wonder constantly delighting us. Conseilobserved and classified his zoophytes, articulates, mollusks, andfish. The days passed quickly, and I no longer kept track ofthem. Ned, as usual, kept looking for changes of pace from ourstandard fare. Like actual snails, we were at home in our shell, and Ican vouch that it’s easy to turn into a full-fledged snail.So this way of living began to seem simple and natural to us, and weno longer envisioned a different lifestyle on the surface of theplanet earth, when something happened to remind us of our strangecircumstances.On January 18 the Nautilus lay in longitude 105 degrees and latitude15 degrees south. The weather was threatening, the sea rough andbillowy. The wind was blowing a strong gust from the east. Thebarometer, which had been falling for some days, forecast anapproaching struggle of the elements.I had climbed onto the platform just as the chief officer was takinghis readings of hour angles. Out of habit I waited for him topronounce his daily phrase. But that day it was replaced by adifferent phrase, just as incomprehensible. Almost at once I sawCaptain Nemo appear, lift his spyglass, and inspect the horizon.For some minutes the captain stood motionless, rooted to the spotcontained within the field of his lens. Then he lowered his spyglassand exchanged about ten words with his chief officer. The latterseemed to be in the grip of an excitement he tried in vain tocontrol. More in command of himself, Captain Nemo remainedcool. Furthermore, he seemed to be raising certain objections that hischief officer kept answering with flat assurances. At least that’swhat I gathered from their differences in tone and gesture.As for me, I stared industriously in the direction under observationbut without spotting a thing. Sky and water merged into a perfectlyclean horizon line.Meanwhile Captain Nemo strolled from one end of the platform to theother, not glancing at me, perhaps not even seeing me. His step wasfirm but less regular than usual. Sometimes he would stop, cross hisarms over his chest, and observe the sea. What could he be looking forover that immense expanse? By then the Nautilus lay hundreds of milesfrom the nearest coast!The chief officer kept lifting his spyglass and stubbornly examiningthe horizon, walking up and down, stamping his foot, in his nervousagitation a sharp contrast to his superior.But this mystery would inevitably be cleared up, and soon, becauseCaptain Nemo gave orders to increase speed; at once the engine steppedup its drive power, setting the propeller in swifter rotation.Just then the chief officer drew the captain’s attention anew. Thelatter interrupted his strolling and aimed his spyglass at the pointindicated. He observed it a good while. As for me, deeply puzzled, Iwent below to the lounge and brought back an excellent long-rangetelescope I habitually used. Leaning my elbows on the beacon housing,which jutted from the stern of the platform, I got set to scour thatwhole stretch of sky and sea.But no sooner had I peered into the eyepiece than the instrument wassnatched from my hands.I spun around. Captain Nemo was standing before me, but I almostdidn’t recognize him. His facial features were transfigured. Gleamingwith dark fire, his eyes had shrunk beneath his frowning brow. Histeeth were half bared. His rigid body, clenched fists, and head drawnbetween his shoulders, all attested to a fierce hate breathing fromevery pore. He didn’t move. My spyglass fell from his hand and rolledat his feet.Had I accidentally caused these symptoms of anger? Did thisincomprehensible individual think I had detected some secret forbiddento guests on the Nautilus?No! I wasn’t the subject of his hate because he wasn’t even looking atme; his eyes stayed stubbornly focused on that inscrutable point ofthe horizon.Finally Captain Nemo regained his self-control. His facial appearance,so profoundly changed, now resumed its usual calm. He addressed a fewwords to his chief officer in their strange language, then he turnedto me:“Professor Aronnax,” he told me in a tone of some urgency, “I ask thatyou now honor one of the binding agreements between us.”“Which one, captain?”“You and your companions must be placed in confinement until I see fitto set you free.”“You’re in command,” I answered, gaping at him. “But may I address aquestion to you?”“You may not, sir.”After that, I stopped objecting and started obeying, since resistancewas useless.I went below to the cabin occupied by Ned Land and Conseil, and Iinformed them of the captain’s decision. I’ll let the reader decidehow this news was received by the Canadian. In any case, there was notime for explanations. Four crewmen were waiting at the door, and theyled us to the cell where we had spent our first night aboard theNautilus.Ned Land tried to lodge a complaint, but the only answer he got was adoor shut in his face.“Will master tell me what this means?” Conseil asked me.I told my companions what had happened. They were as astonished as Iwas, but no wiser.Then I sank into deep speculation, and Captain Nemo’s strange facialseizure kept haunting me. I was incapable of connecting two ideas inlogical order, and I had strayed into the most absurd hypotheses, whenI was snapped out of my mental struggles by these words from Ned Land:“Well, look here! Lunch is served!”Indeed, the table had been laid. Apparently Captain Nemo had giventhis order at the same time he commanded the Nautilus to pick upspeed.“Will master allow me to make him a recommendation?” Conseil asked me.“Yes, my boy,” I replied.“Well, master needs to eat his lunch! It’s prudent, because we have noidea what the future holds.”“You’re right, Conseil.”“Unfortunately,” Ned Land said, “they’ve only given us the standardmenu.”“Ned my friend,” Conseil answered, “what would you say if they’d givenus no lunch at all?”This dose of sanity cut the harpooner’s complaints clean off.We sat down at the table. Our meal proceeded pretty much in silence. Iate very little. Conseil, everlastingly prudent, “force-fed” himself;and despite the menu, Ned Land didn’t waste a bite. Then, lunch over,each of us propped himself in a corner.Just then the luminous globe lighting our cell went out, leaving us inprofound darkness. Ned Land soon dozed off, and to my astonishment,Conseil also fell into a heavy slumber. I was wondering what couldhave caused this urgent need for sleep, when I felt a dense torporsaturate my brain. I tried to keep my eyes open, but they closed inspite of me. I was in the grip of anguished hallucinations. Obviouslysome sleep-inducing substance had been laced into the food we’d justeaten! So imprisonment wasn’t enough to conceal Captain Nemo’s plansfrom us—sleep was needed as well!Then I heard the hatches close. The sea’s undulations, which had beencreating a gentle rocking motion, now ceased. Had the Nautilus leftthe surface of the ocean? Was it reentering the motionless strata deepin the sea?I tried to fight off this drowsiness. It was impossible. My breathinggrew weaker. I felt a mortal chill freeze my dull, nearly paralyzedlimbs. Like little domes of lead, my lids fell over my eyes. Icouldn’t raise them. A morbid sleep, full of hallucinations, seized mywhole being. Then the visions disappeared and left me in utteroblivion.CHAPTER 24The Coral RealmTHE NEXT DAY I woke up with my head unusually clear. Much to mysurprise, I was in my stateroom. No doubt my companions had been putback in their cabin without noticing it any more than I had. Like me,they would have no idea what took place during the night, and tounravel this mystery I could count only on some future happenstance.I then considered leaving my stateroom. Was I free or still aprisoner? Perfectly free. I opened my door, headed down the gangways,and climbed the central companionway. Hatches that had been closed theday before were now open. I arrived on the platform.Ned Land and Conseil were there waiting for me. I questionedthem. They knew nothing. Lost in a heavy sleep of which they had nomemory, they were quite startled to be back in their cabin.As for the Nautilus, it seemed as tranquil and mysterious as ever. Itwas cruising on the surface of the waves at a moderate speed. Nothingseemed to have changed on board.Ned Land observed the sea with his penetrating eyes. It wasdeserted. The Canadian sighted nothing new on the horizon, neithersail nor shore. A breeze was blowing noisily from the west, anddisheveled by the wind, long billows made the submersible roll verynoticeably.After renewing its air, the Nautilus stayed at an average depth offifteen meters, enabling it to return quickly to the surface of thewaves. And, contrary to custom, it executed such a maneuver severaltimes during that day of January 19. The chief officer would thenclimb onto the platform, and his usual phrase would ring through theship’s interior.As for Captain Nemo, he didn’t appear. Of the other men on board, Isaw only my emotionless steward, who served me with his usual muteefficiency.Near two o’clock I was busy organizing my notes in the lounge, whenthe captain opened the door and appeared. I bowed to him. He gave mean almost imperceptible bow in return, without saying a word to me. Iresumed my work, hoping he might give me some explanation of theprevious afternoon’s events. He did nothing of the sort. I stared athim. His face looked exhausted; his reddened eyes hadn’t beenrefreshed by sleep; his facial features expressed profound sadness,real chagrin. He walked up and down, sat and stood, picked up a bookat random, discarded it immediately, consulted his instruments withouttaking his customary notes, and seemed unable to rest easy for aninstant.Finally he came over to me and said:“Are you a physician, Professor Aronnax?”This inquiry was so unexpected that I stared at him a good whilewithout replying.“Are you a physician?” he repeated. “Several of your scientificcolleagues took their degrees in medicine, such as Gratiolet,Moquin-Tandon, and others.”“That’s right,” I said, “I am a doctor, I used to be on call at thehospitals. I was in practice for several years before joining themuseum.”“Excellent, sir.”My reply obviously pleased Captain Nemo. But not knowing what he wasdriving at, I waited for further questions, ready to reply ascircumstances dictated.“Professor Aronnax,” the captain said to me, “would you consent togive your medical attentions to one of my men?”“Someone is sick?”“Yes.”“I’m ready to go with you.”“Come.”I admit that my heart was pounding. Lord knows why, but I saw adefinite connection between this sick crewman and yesterday’shappenings, and the mystery of those events concerned me at least asmuch as the man’s sickness.Captain Nemo led me to the Nautilus’s stern and invited me into acabin located next to the sailors’ quarters.On a bed there lay a man some forty years old, with strongly moldedfeatures, the very image of an Anglo-Saxon.I bent over him. Not only was he sick, he was wounded. Swathed inblood-soaked linen, his head was resting on a folded pillow. I undidthe linen bandages, while the wounded man gazed with great staringeyes and let me proceed without making a single complaint.It was a horrible wound. The cranium had been smashed open by someblunt instrument, leaving the naked brains exposed, and the cerebralmatter had suffered deep abrasions. Blood clots had formed in thisdissolving mass, taking on the color of wine dregs. Both contusion andconcussion of the brain had occurred. The sick man’s breathing waslabored, and muscle spasms quivered in his face. Cerebral inflammationwas complete and had brought on a paralysis of movement and sensation.I took the wounded man’s pulse. It was intermittent. The body’sextremities were already growing cold, and I saw that death wasapproaching without any possibility of my holding it in check. Afterdressing the poor man’s wound, I redid the linen bandages around hishead, and I turned to Captain Nemo.“How did he get this wound?” I asked him.“That’s not important,” the captain replied evasively. “The Nautilussuffered a collision that cracked one of the engine levers, and itstruck this man. My chief officer was standing beside him. This manleaped forward to intercept the blow. A brother lays down his life forhis brother, a friend for his friend, what could be simpler? That’sthe law for everyone on board the Nautilus. But what’s your diagnosisof his condition?”I hesitated to speak my mind.“You may talk freely,” the captain told me. “This man doesn’tunderstand French.”I took a last look at the wounded man, then I replied:“This man will be dead in two hours.”“Nothing can save him?”“Nothing.”Captain Nemo clenched his fists, and tears slid from his eyes, which Ihad thought incapable of weeping.For a few moments more I observed the dying man, whose life was ebbinglittle by little. He grew still more pale under the electric lightthat bathed his deathbed. I looked at his intelligent head, furrowedwith premature wrinkles that misfortune, perhaps misery, had etchedlong before. I was hoping to detect the secret of his life in the lastwords that might escape from his lips!“You may go, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo told me.I left the captain in the dying man’s cabin and I repaired to mystateroom, very moved by this scene. All day long I was aquiver withgruesome forebodings. That night I slept poorly, and between my fitfuldreams, I thought I heard a distant moaning, like a funeral dirge. Wasit a prayer for the dead, murmured in that language I couldn’tunderstand?The next morning I climbed on deck. Captain Nemo was already there. Assoon as he saw me, he came over.“Professor,” he said to me, “would it be convenient for you to make anunderwater excursion today?”“With my companions?” I asked.“If they’re agreeable.”“We’re yours to command, captain.”“Then kindly put on your diving suits.”As for the dead or dying man, he hadn’t come into the picture. Irejoined Ned Land and Conseil. I informed them of Captain Nemo’sproposition. Conseil was eager to accept, and this time the Canadianproved perfectly amenable to going with us.It was eight o’clock in the morning. By 8:30 we were suited up forthis new stroll and equipped with our two devices for lighting andbreathing. The double door opened, and accompanied by Captain Nemowith a dozen crewmen following, we set foot on the firm seafloor wherethe Nautilus was resting, ten meters down.A gentle slope gravitated to an uneven bottom whose depth was aboutfifteen fathoms. This bottom was completely different from the one Ihad visited during my first excursion under the waters of the PacificOcean. Here I saw no fine-grained sand, no underwater prairies, notone open-sea forest. I immediately recognized the wondrous region inwhich Captain Nemo did the honors that day. It was the coral realm.In the zoophyte branch, class Alcyonaria, one finds the orderGorgonaria, which contains three groups: sea fans, isidian polyps, andcoral polyps. It’s in this last that precious coral belongs, anunusual substance that, at different times, has been classified in themineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms. Medicine to the ancients,jewelry to the moderns, it wasn’t decisively placed in the animalkingdom until 1694, by Peysonnel of Marseilles.A coral is a unit of tiny animals assembled over a polypary that’sbrittle and stony in nature. These polyps have a unique generatingmechanism that reproduces them via the budding process, and they havean individual existence while also participating in a communallife. Hence they embody a sort of natural socialism. I was familiarwith the latest research on this bizarre zoophyte—which turns to stonewhile taking on a tree form, as some naturalists have very aptlyobserved—and nothing could have been more fascinating to me than tovisit one of these petrified forests that nature has planted on thebottom of the sea.We turned on our Ruhmkorff devices and went along a coral shoal in theprocess of forming, which, given time, will someday close off thiswhole part of the Indian Ocean. Our path was bordered by hopelesslytangled bushes, formed from snarls of shrubs all covered with littlestar-shaped, white-streaked flowers. Only, contrary to plants onshore, these tree forms become attached to rocks on the seafloor byheading from top to bottom.Our lights produced a thousand delightful effects while playing overthese brightly colored boughs. I fancied I saw these cylindrical,membrane-filled tubes trembling beneath the water’s undulations. I wastempted to gather their fresh petals, which were adorned with delicatetentacles, some newly in bloom, others barely opened, while nimblefish with fluttering fins brushed past them like flocks of birds. Butif my hands came near the moving flowers of these sensitive, livelycreatures, an alarm would instantly sound throughout the colony. Thewhite petals retracted into their red sheaths, the flowers vanishedbefore my eyes, and the bush changed into a chunk of stony nipples.Sheer chance had placed me in the presence of the most valuablespecimens of this zoophyte. This coral was the equal of those fishedup from the Mediterranean off the Barbary Coast or the shores ofFrance and Italy. With its bright colors, it lived up to those poeticnames of blood flower and blood foam that the industry confers on itsfinest exhibits. Coral sells for as much as 500 francs per kilogram,and in this locality the liquid strata hid enough to make the fortunesof a whole host of coral fishermen. This valuable substance oftenmerges with other polyparies, forming compact, hopelessly tangledunits known as “macciota,” and I noted some wonderful pink samples ofthis coral.But as the bushes shrank, the tree forms magnified. Actual petrifiedthickets and long alcoves from some fantastic school of architecturekept opening up before our steps. Captain Nemo entered beneath a darkgallery whose gentle slope took us to a depth of 100 meters. The lightfrom our glass coils produced magical effects at times, lingering onthe wrinkled roughness of some natural arch, or some overhangsuspended like a chandelier, which our lamps flecked with fierysparks. Amid these shrubs of precious coral, I observed other polypsno less unusual: melita coral, rainbow coral with jointed outgrowths,then a few tufts of genus Corallina, some green and others red,actually a type of seaweed encrusted with limestone salts, which,after long disputes, naturalists have finally placed in the vegetablekingdom. But as one intellectual has remarked, “Here, perhaps, is theactual point where life rises humbly out of slumbering stone, butwithout breaking away from its crude starting point.”Finally, after two hours of walking, we reached a depth of about 300meters, in other words, the lowermost limit at which coral can beginto form. But here it was no longer some isolated bush or a modestgrove of low timber. It was an immense forest, huge mineralvegetation, enormous petrified trees linked by garlands of eleganthydras from the genus Plumularia, those tropical creepers of the sea,all decked out in shades and gleams. We passed freely under theirlofty boughs, lost up in the shadows of the waves, while at our feetorgan-pipe coral, stony coral, star coral, fungus coral, and seaanemone from the genus Caryophylia formed a carpet of flowers allstrewn with dazzling gems.What an indescribable sight! Oh, if only we could share our feelings!Why were we imprisoned behind these masks of metal and glass! Why werewe forbidden to talk with each other! At least let us lead the livesof the fish that populate this liquid element, or better yet, thelives of amphibians, which can spend long hours either at sea or onshore, traveling through their double domain as their whims dictate!Meanwhile Captain Nemo had called a halt. My companions and I stoppedwalking, and turning around, I saw the crewmen form a semicirclearound their leader. Looking with greater care, I observed that fourof them were carrying on their shoulders an object that was oblong inshape.At this locality we stood in the center of a huge clearing surroundedby the tall tree forms of this underwater forest. Our lamps cast asort of brilliant twilight over the area, making inordinately longshadows on the seafloor. Past the boundaries of the clearing, thedarkness deepened again, relieved only by little sparkles given off bythe sharp crests of coral.Ned Land and Conseil stood next to me. We stared, and it dawned on methat I was about to witness a strange scene. Observing the seafloor, Isaw that it swelled at certain points from low bulges that wereencrusted with limestone deposits and arranged with a symmetry thatbetrayed the hand of man.In the middle of the clearing, on a pedestal of roughly piled rocks,there stood a cross of coral, extending long arms you would havethought were made of petrified blood.At a signal from Captain Nemo, one of his men stepped forward and, afew feet from this cross, detached a mattock from his belt and beganto dig a hole.I finally understood! This clearing was a cemetery, this hole a grave,that oblong object the body of the man who must have died during thenight! Captain Nemo and his men had come to bury their companion inthis communal resting place on the inaccessible ocean floor!No! My mind was reeling as never before! Never had ideas of suchimpact raced through my brain! I didn’t want to see what my eyes saw!Meanwhile the grave digging went slowly. Fish fled here and there astheir retreat was disturbed. I heard the pick ringing on the limestonesoil, its iron tip sometimes giving off sparks when it hit a straypiece of flint on the sea bottom. The hole grew longer, wider, andsoon was deep enough to receive the body.Then the pallbearers approached. Wrapped in white fabric made fromfilaments of the fan mussel, the body was lowered into its waterygrave. Captain Nemo, arms crossed over his chest, knelt in a postureof prayer, as did all the friends of him who had loved them. . . . Mytwo companions and I bowed reverently.The grave was then covered over with the rubble dug from the seafloor,and it formed a low mound.When this was done, Captain Nemo and his men stood up; then they allapproached the grave, sank again on bended knee, and extended theirhands in a sign of final farewell. . . .Then the funeral party went back up the path to the Nautilus,returning beneath the arches of the forest, through the thickets,along the coral bushes, going steadily higher.Finally the ship’s rays appeared. Their luminous trail guided us tothe Nautilus. By one o’clock we had returned.After changing clothes, I climbed onto the platform, and in the gripof dreadfully obsessive thoughts, I sat next to the beacon.Captain Nemo rejoined me. I stood up and said to him:“So, as I predicted, that man died during the night?”“Yes, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo replied.“And now he rests beside his companions in that coral cemetery?”“Yes, forgotten by the world but not by us! We dig the graves, thenentrust the polyps with sealing away our dead for eternity!”And with a sudden gesture, the captain hid his face in his clenchedfists, vainly trying to hold back a sob. Then he added:“There lies our peaceful cemetery, hundreds of feet beneath thesurface of the waves!”“At least, captain, your dead can sleep serenely there, out of thereach of sharks!”“Yes, sir,” Captain Nemo replied solemnly, “of sharks and men!”END OF THE FIRST PARTSECOND PARTCHAPTER 1The Indian OceanNOW WE BEGIN the second part of this voyage under the seas. The firstended in that moving scene at the coral cemetery, which left aprofound impression on my mind. And so Captain Nemo would live out hislife entirely in the heart of this immense sea, and even his grave layready in its impenetrable depths. There the last sleep of theNautilus’s occupants, friends bound together in death as in life,would be disturbed by no monster of the deep! “No man either!” thecaptain had added.Always that same fierce, implacable defiance of human society!As for me, I was no longer content with the hypotheses that satisfiedConseil. That fine lad persisted in seeing the Nautilus’s commander asmerely one of those unappreciated scientists who repay humanity’sindifference with contempt. For Conseil, the captain was still amisunderstood genius who, tired of the world’s deceptions, had beendriven to take refuge in this inaccessible environment where he wasfree to follow his instincts. But to my mind, this hypothesisexplained only one side of Captain Nemo.In fact, the mystery of that last afternoon when we were locked inprison and put to sleep, the captain’s violent precaution of snatchingfrom my grasp a spyglass poised to scour the horizon, and the fatalwound given that man during some unexplained collision suffered by theNautilus, all led me down a plain trail. No! Captain Nemo wasn’tcontent simply to avoid humanity! His fearsome submersible served notonly his quest for freedom, but also, perhaps, it was used inlord-knows-what schemes of dreadful revenge.Right now, nothing is clear to me, I still glimpse only glimmers inthe dark, and I must limit my pen, as it were, to taking dictationfrom events.But nothing binds us to Captain Nemo. He believes that escaping fromthe Nautilus is impossible. We are not even constrained by our word ofhonor. No promises fetter us. We’re simply captives, prisonersmasquerading under the name “guests” for the sake of everydaycourtesy. Even so, Ned Land hasn’t given up all hope of recovering hisfreedom. He’s sure to take advantage of the first chance that comeshis way. No doubt I will do likewise. And yet I will feel some regretat making off with the Nautilus’s secrets, so generously unveiled forus by Captain Nemo! Because, ultimately, should we detest or admirethis man? Is he the persecutor or the persecuted? And in all honesty,before I leave him forever, I want to finish this underwater tour ofthe world, whose first stages have been so magnificent. I want toobserve the full series of these wonders gathered under the seas ofour globe. I want to see what no man has seen yet, even if I must payfor this insatiable curiosity with my life! What are my discoveries todate? Nothing, relatively speaking—since so far we’ve covered only6,000 leagues across the Pacific!Nevertheless, I’m well aware that the Nautilus is drawing near topopulated shores, and if some chance for salvation becomes availableto us, it would be sheer cruelty to sacrifice my companions to mypassion for the unknown. I must go with them, perhaps even guidethem. But will this opportunity ever arise? The human being, robbed ofhis free will, craves such an opportunity; but the scientist, foreverinquisitive, dreads it.That day, January 21, 1868, the chief officer went at noon to take thesun’s altitude. I climbed onto the platform, lit a cigar, and watchedhim at work. It seemed obvious to me that this man didn’t understandFrench, because I made several remarks in a loud voice that were boundto provoke him to some involuntary show of interest had he understoodthem; but he remained mute and emotionless.While he took his sights with his sextant, one of the Nautilus’ssailors—that muscular man who had gone with us to Crespo Island duringour first underwater excursion—came up to clean the glass panes of thebeacon. I then examined the fittings of this mechanism, whose powerwas increased a hundredfold by biconvex lenses that were designed likethose in a lighthouse and kept its rays productively focused. Thiselectric lamp was so constructed as to yield its maximum illuminatingpower. In essence, its light was generated in a vacuum, insuring bothits steadiness and intensity. Such a vacuum also reduced wear on thegraphite points between which the luminous arc expanded. This was animportant savings for Captain Nemo, who couldn’t easily renewthem. But under these conditions, wear and tear were almostnonexistent.When the Nautilus was ready to resume its underwater travels, I wentbelow again to the lounge. The hatches closed once more, and ourcourse was set due west.We then plowed the waves of the Indian Ocean, vast liquid plains withan area of 550,000,000 hectares, whose waters are so transparent itmakes you dizzy to lean over their surface. There the Nautilusgenerally drifted at a depth between 100 and 200 meters. It behaved inthis way for some days. To anyone without my grand passion for thesea, these hours would surely have seemed long and monotonous; but mydaily strolls on the platform where I was revived by the life-givingocean air, the sights in the rich waters beyond the lounge windows,the books to be read in the library, and the composition of mymemoirs, took up all my time and left me without a moment of wearinessor boredom.All in all, we enjoyed a highly satisfactory state of health. The dieton board agreed with us perfectly, and for my part, I could easilyhave gone without those changes of pace that Ned Land, in a spirit ofprotest, kept taxing his ingenuity to supply us. What’s more, in thisconstant temperature we didn’t even have to worry about catchingcolds. Besides, the ship had a good stock of the madreporeDendrophylia, known in Provence by the name sea fennel, and a poulticemade from the dissolved flesh of its polyps will furnish an excellentcough medicine.For some days we saw a large number of aquatic birds with webbed feet,known as gulls or sea mews. Some were skillfully slain, and whencooked in a certain fashion, they make a very acceptable platter ofwater game. Among the great wind riders—carried over long distancesfrom every shore and resting on the waves from their exhaustingflights—I spotted some magnificent albatross, birds belonging to theLongipennes (long-winged) family, whose discordant calls sound likethe braying of an ass. The Totipalmes (fully webbed) family wasrepresented by swift frigate birds, nimbly catching fish at thesurface, and by numerous tropic birds of the genus Phaeton, amongothers the red-tailed tropic bird, the size of a pigeon, its whiteplumage shaded with pink tints that contrasted with its dark-huedwings.The Nautilus’s nets hauled up several types of sea turtle from thehawksbill genus with arching backs whose scales are highlyprized. Diving easily, these reptiles can remain a good whileunderwater by closing the fleshy valves located at the externalopenings of their nasal passages. When they were captured, somehawksbills were still asleep inside their carapaces, a refuge fromother marine animals. The flesh of these turtles was nothingmemorable, but their eggs made an excellent feast.As for fish, they always filled us with wonderment when, staringthrough the open panels, we could unveil the secrets of their aquaticlives. I noted several species I hadn’t previously been able toobserve.I’ll mention chiefly some trunkfish unique to the Red Sea, the sea ofthe East Indies, and that part of the ocean washing the coasts ofequinoctial America. Like turtles, armadillos, sea urchins, andcrustaceans, these fish are protected by armor plate that’s neitherchalky nor stony but actual bone. Sometimes this armor takes the shapeof a solid triangle, sometimes that of a solid quadrangle. Among thetriangular type, I noticed some half a decimeter long, with browntails, yellow fins, and wholesome, exquisitely tasty flesh; I evenrecommend that they be acclimatized to fresh water, a change,incidentally, that a number of saltwater fish can make with ease. I’llalso mention some quadrangular trunkfish topped by four largeprotuberances along the back; trunkfish sprinkled with white spots onthe underside of the body, which make good house pets like certainbirds; boxfish armed with stings formed by extensions of their bonycrusts, and whose odd grunting has earned them the nickname “seapigs”; then some trunkfish known as dromedaries, with tough, leatheryflesh and big conical humps.From the daily notes kept by Mr. Conseil, I also retrieve certain fishfrom the genus Tetradon unique to these seas: southern puffers withred backs and white chests distinguished by three lengthwise rows offilaments, and jugfish, seven inches long, decked out in the brightestcolors. Then, as specimens of other genera, blowfish resembling a darkbrown egg, furrowed with white bands, and lacking tails; globefish,genuine porcupines of the sea, armed with stings and able to inflatethemselves until they look like a pin cushion bristling with needles;seahorses common to every ocean; flying dragonfish with long snoutsand highly distended pectoral fins shaped like wings, which enablethem, if not to fly, at least to spring into the air; spatula-shapedpaddlefish whose tails are covered with many scaly rings; snipefishwith long jaws, excellent animals twenty-five centimeters long andgleaming with the most cheerful colors; bluish gray dragonets withwrinkled heads; myriads of leaping blennies with black stripes andlong pectoral fins, gliding over the surface of the water withprodigious speed; delicious sailfish that can hoist their fins in afavorable current like so many unfurled sails; splendid nurseryfish onwhich nature has lavished yellow, azure, silver, and gold; yellowmackerel with wings made of filaments; bullheads forever spatteredwith mud, which make distinct hissing sounds; sea robins whose liversare thought to be poisonous; ladyfish that can flutter their eyelids;finally, archerfish with long, tubular snouts, real oceangoingflycatchers, armed with a rifle unforeseen by either Remington orChassepot: it slays insects by shooting them with a simple drop ofwater.From the eighty-ninth fish genus in Lacépède’s system ofclassification, belonging to his second subclass of bony fish(characterized by gill covers and a bronchial membrane), I noted somescorpionfish whose heads are adorned with stings and which have onlyone dorsal fin; these animals are covered with small scales, or havenone at all, depending on the subgenus to which they belong. Thesecond subgenus gave us some Didactylus specimens three to fourdecimeters long, streaked with yellow, their heads having aphantasmagoric appearance. As for the first subgenus, it furnishedseveral specimens of that bizarre fish aptly nicknamed “toadfish,”whose big head is sometimes gouged with deep cavities, sometimesswollen with protuberances; bristling with stings and strewn withnodules, it sports hideously irregular horns; its body and tail areadorned with callosities; its stings can inflict dangerous injuries;it’s repulsive and horrible.From January 21 to the 23rd, the Nautilus traveled at the rate of 250leagues in twenty-four hours, hence 540 miles at twenty-two miles perhour. If, during our trip, we were able to identify these differentvarieties of fish, it’s because they were attracted by our electriclight and tried to follow alongside; but most of them wereoutdistanced by our speed and soon fell behind; temporarily, however,a few managed to keep pace in the Nautilus’s waters.On the morning of the 24th, in latitude 12 degrees 5’ south andlongitude 94 degrees 33’, we raised Keeling Island, a madreporicupheaving planted with magnificent coconut trees, which had beenvisited by Mr. Darwin and Captain Fitzroy. The Nautilus cruised alonga short distance off the shore of this desert island. Our dragnetsbrought up many specimens of polyps and echinoderms plus some unusualshells from the branch Mollusca. Captain Nemo’s treasures wereenhanced by some valuable exhibits from the delphinula snail species,to which I joined some pointed star coral, a sort of parasiticpolypary that often attaches itself to seashells.Soon Keeling Island disappeared below the horizon, and our course wasset to the northwest, toward the tip of the Indian peninsula.“Civilization!” Ned Land told me that day. “Much better than thosePapuan Islands where we ran into more savages than venison! On thisIndian shore, professor, there are roads and railways, English,French, and Hindu villages. We wouldn’t go five miles without bumpinginto a fellow countryman. Come on now, isn’t it time for our suddendeparture from Captain Nemo?”“No, no, Ned,” I replied in a very firm tone. “Let’s ride it out, asyou seafaring fellows say. The Nautilus is approaching populatedareas. It’s going back toward Europe, let it take us there. After wearrive in home waters, we can do as we see fit. Besides, I don’timagine Captain Nemo will let us go hunting on the coasts of Malabaror Coromandel as he did in the forests of New Guinea.”“Well, sir, can’t we manage without his permission?”I didn’t answer the Canadian. I wanted no arguments. Deep down, I wasdetermined to fully exploit the good fortune that had put me on boardthe Nautilus.After leaving Keeling Island, our pace got generally slower. It alsogot more unpredictable, often taking us to great depths. Several timeswe used our slanting fins, which internal levers could set at anoblique angle to our waterline. Thus we went as deep as two or threekilometers down but without ever verifying the lowest depths of thissea near India, which soundings of 13,000 meters have been unable toreach. As for the temperature in these lower strata, the thermometeralways and invariably indicated 4 degrees centigrade. I merelyobserved that in the upper layers, the water was always colder overshallows than in the open sea.On January 25, the ocean being completely deserted, the Nautilus spentthe day on the surface, churning the waves with its powerful propellerand making them spurt to great heights. Under these conditions, whowouldn’t have mistaken it for a gigantic cetacean? I spentthree-quarters of the day on the platform. I stared at thesea. Nothing on the horizon, except near four o’clock in the afternoona long steamer to the west, running on our opposite tack. Its mastingwas visible for an instant, but it couldn’t have seen the Nautilusbecause we were lying too low in the water. I imagine that steamboatbelonged to the Peninsular & Oriental line, which provides servicefrom the island of Ceylon to Sydney, also calling at King George Soundand Melbourne.At five o’clock in the afternoon, just before that brief twilight thatlinks day with night in tropical zones, Conseil and I marveled at anunusual sight.It was a delightful animal whose discovery, according to the ancients,is a sign of good luck. Aristotle, Athenaeus, Pliny, and Oppianstudied its habits and lavished on its behalf all the scientificpoetry of Greece and Italy. They called it “nautilus” and “pompilius.”But modern science has not endorsed these designations, and thismollusk is now known by the name argonaut.Anyone consulting Conseil would soon learn from the gallant lad thatthe branch Mollusca is divided into five classes; that the first classfeatures the Cephalopoda (whose members are sometimes naked, sometimescovered with a shell), which consists of two families, theDibranchiata and the Tetrabranchiata, which are distinguished by theirnumber of gills; that the family Dibranchiata includes three genera,the argonaut, the squid, and the cuttlefish, and that the familyTetrabranchiata contains only one genus, the nautilus. After thiscatalog, if some recalcitrant listener confuses the argonaut, which isacetabuliferous (in other words, a bearer of suction tubes), with thenautilus, which is tentaculiferous (a bearer of tentacles), it will besimply unforgivable.Now, it was a school of argonauts then voyaging on the surface of theocean. We could count several hundred of them. They belonged to thatspecies of argonaut covered with protuberances and exclusive to theseas near India.These graceful mollusks were swimming backward by means of theirlocomotive tubes, sucking water into these tubes and then expellingit. Six of their eight tentacles were long, thin, and floated on thewater, while the other two were rounded into palms and spread to thewind like light sails. I could see perfectly their undulating,spiral-shaped shells, which Cuvier aptly compared to an elegantcockleboat. It’s an actual boat indeed. It transports the animal thatsecretes it without the animal sticking to it.“The argonaut is free to leave its shell,” I told Conseil, “but itnever does.”“Not unlike Captain Nemo,” Conseil replied sagely. “Which is why heshould have christened his ship the Argonaut.”For about an hour the Nautilus cruised in the midst of this school ofmollusks. Then, lord knows why, they were gripped with a suddenfear. As if at a signal, every sail was abruptly lowered; arms folded,bodies contracted, shells turned over by changing their center ofgravity, and the whole flotilla disappeared under the waves. It wasinstantaneous, and no squadron of ships ever maneuvered with greatertogetherness.Just then night fell suddenly, and the waves barely surged in thebreeze, spreading placidly around the Nautilus’s side plates.The next day, January 26, we cut the equator on the 82nd meridian andwe reentered the northern hemisphere.During that day a fearsome school of sharks provided us with anescort. Dreadful animals that teem in these seas and make themextremely dangerous. There were Port Jackson sharks with a brown back,a whitish belly, and eleven rows of teeth, bigeye sharks with necksmarked by a large black spot encircled in white and resembling an eye,and Isabella sharks whose rounded snouts were strewn with darkspeckles. Often these powerful animals rushed at the lounge windowwith a violence less than comforting. By this point Ned Land had lostall self-control. He wanted to rise to the surface of the waves andharpoon the monsters, especially certain smooth-hound sharks whosemouths were paved with teeth arranged like a mosaic, and some bigfive-meter tiger sharks that insisted on personally provoking him. Butthe Nautilus soon picked up speed and easily left astern the fastestof these man-eaters.On January 27, at the entrance to the huge Bay of Bengal, werepeatedly encountered a gruesome sight: human corpses floating on thesurface of the waves! Carried by the Ganges to the high seas, thesewere deceased Indian villagers who hadn’t been fully devoured byvultures, the only morticians in these parts. But there was noshortage of sharks to assist them with their undertaking chores.Near seven o’clock in the evening, the Nautilus lay half submerged,navigating in the midst of milky white waves. As far as the eye couldsee, the ocean seemed lactified. Was it an effect of the moon’s rays?No, because the new moon was barely two days old and was still lostbelow the horizon in the sun’s rays. The entire sky, although lit upby stellar radiation, seemed pitch-black in comparison with thewhiteness of these waters.Conseil couldn’t believe his eyes, and he questioned me about thecauses of this odd phenomenon. Luckily I was in a position to answerhim.“That’s called a milk sea,” I told him, “a vast expanse of white wavesoften seen along the coasts of Amboina and in these waterways.”“But,” Conseil asked, “could master tell me the cause of this effect,because I presume this water hasn’t really changed into milk!”“No, my boy, and this whiteness that amazes you is merely due to thepresence of myriads of tiny creatures called infusoria, a sort ofdiminutive glowworm that’s colorless and gelatinous in appearance, asthick as a strand of hair, and no longer than one-fifth of amillimeter. Some of these tiny creatures stick together over an areaof several leagues.”“Several leagues!” Conseil exclaimed.“Yes, my boy, and don’t even try to compute the number of theseinfusoria. You won’t pull it off, because if I’m not mistaken, certainnavigators have cruised through milk seas for more than forty miles.”I’m not sure that Conseil heeded my recommendation, because he seemedto be deep in thought, no doubt trying to calculate how manyone-fifths of a millimeter are found in forty square miles. As for me,I continued to observe this phenomenon. For several hours theNautilus’s spur sliced through these whitish waves, and I watched itglide noiselessly over this soapy water, as if it were cruisingthrough those foaming eddies that a bay’s currents and countercurrentssometimes leave between each other.Near midnight the sea suddenly resumed its usual hue, but behind usall the way to the horizon, the skies kept mirroring the whiteness ofthose waves and for a good while seemed imbued with the hazy glow ofan aurora borealis.CHAPTER 2A New Proposition from Captain NemoON JANUARY 28, in latitude 9 degrees 4’ north, when the Nautilusreturned at noon to the surface of the sea, it lay in sight of landsome eight miles to the west. Right off, I observed a cluster ofmountains about 2,000 feet high, whose shapes were very whimsicallysculpted. After our position fix, I reentered the lounge, and when ourbearings were reported on the chart, I saw that we were off the islandof Ceylon, that pearl dangling from the lower lobe of the Indianpeninsula.I went looking in the library for a book about this island, one of themost fertile in the world. Sure enough, I found a volume entitledCeylon and the Singhalese by H. C. Sirr, Esq. Reentering the lounge, Ifirst noted the bearings of Ceylon, on which antiquity lavished somany different names. It was located between latitude 5 degrees 55’and 9 degrees 49’ north, and between longitude 79 degrees 42’ and 82degrees 4’ east of the meridian of Greenwich; its length is 275 miles;its maximum width, 150 miles; its circumference, 900 miles; itssurface area, 24,448 square miles, in other words, a little smallerthan that of Ireland.Just then Captain Nemo and his chief officer appeared.The captain glanced at the chart. Then, turning to me:“The island of Ceylon,” he said, “is famous for its pearlfisheries. Would you be interested, Professor Aronnax, in visiting oneof those fisheries?”“Certainly, captain.”“Fine. It’s easily done. Only, when we see the fisheries, we’ll see nofishermen. The annual harvest hasn’t yet begun. No matter. I’ll giveorders to make for the Gulf of Mannar, and we’ll arrive there latetonight.”The captain said a few words to his chief officer who went outimmediately. Soon the Nautilus reentered its liquid element, and thepressure gauge indicated that it was staying at a depth of thirtyfeet.With the chart under my eyes, I looked for the Gulf of Mannar. I foundit by the 9th parallel off the northwestern shores of Ceylon. It wasformed by the long curve of little Mannar Island. To reach it we hadto go all the way up Ceylon’s west coast.“Professor,” Captain Nemo then told me, “there are pearl fisheries inthe Bay of Bengal, the seas of the East Indies, the seas of China andJapan, plus those seas south of the United States, the Gulf of Panamaand the Gulf of California; but it’s off Ceylon that such fishingreaps its richest rewards. No doubt we’ll be arriving a littleearly. Fishermen gather in the Gulf of Mannar only during the month ofMarch, and for thirty days some 300 boats concentrate on the lucrativeharvest of these treasures from the sea. Each boat is manned by tenoarsmen and ten fishermen. The latter divide into two groups, dive inrotation, and descend to a depth of twelve meters with the help of aheavy stone clutched between their feet and attached by a rope totheir boat.”“You mean,” I said, “that such primitive methods are still all thatthey use?”“All,” Captain Nemo answered me, “although these fisheries belong tothe most industrialized people in the world, the English, to whom theTreaty of Amiens granted them in 1802.”“Yet it strikes me that diving suits like yours could perform yeomanservice in such work.”“Yes, since those poor fishermen can’t stay long underwater. On hisvoyage to Ceylon, the Englishman Percival made much of a Kaffir whostayed under five minutes without coming up to the surface, but I findthat hard to believe. I know that some divers can last up tofifty-seven seconds, and highly skillful ones to eighty-seven; butsuch men are rare, and when the poor fellows climb back on board, thewater coming out of their noses and ears is tinted with blood. Ibelieve the average time underwater that these fishermen can tolerateis thirty seconds, during which they hastily stuff their little netswith all the pearl oysters they can tear loose. But these fishermengenerally don’t live to advanced age: their vision weakens, ulcersbreak out on their eyes, sores form on their bodies, and some are evenstricken with apoplexy on the ocean floor.”“Yes,” I said, “it’s a sad occupation, and one that exists only togratify the whims of fashion. But tell me, captain, how many oysterscan a boat fish up in a workday?”“About 40,000 to 50,000. It’s even said that in 1814, when the Englishgovernment went fishing on its own behalf, its divers worked justtwenty days and brought up 76,000,000 oysters.”“At least,” I asked, “the fishermen are well paid, aren’t they?”“Hardly, professor. In Panama they make just $1.00 per week. In mostplaces they earn only a penny for each oyster that has a pearl, andthey bring up so many that have none!”“Only one penny to those poor people who make their employers rich!That’s atrocious!”“On that note, professor,” Captain Nemo told me, “you and yourcompanions will visit the Mannar oysterbank, and if by chance someeager fisherman arrives early, well, we can watch him at work.”“That suits me, captain.”“By the way, Professor Aronnax, you aren’t afraid of sharks, are you?”“Sharks?” I exclaimed.This struck me as a pretty needless question, to say the least.“Well?” Captain Nemo went on.“I admit, captain, I’m not yet on very familiar terms with that genusof fish.”“We’re used to them, the rest of us,” Captain Nemo answered. “And intime you will be too. Anyhow, we’ll be armed, and on our way we mighthunt a man-eater or two. It’s a fascinating sport. So, professor, I’llsee you tomorrow, bright and early.”This said in a carefree tone, Captain Nemo left the lounge.If you’re invited to hunt bears in the Swiss mountains, you might say:“Oh good, I get to go bear hunting tomorrow!” If you’re invited tohunt lions on the Atlas plains or tigers in the jungles of India, youmight say: “Ha! Now’s my chance to hunt lions and tigers!” But ifyou’re invited to hunt sharks in their native element, you might wantto think it over before accepting.As for me, I passed a hand over my brow, where beads of cold sweatwere busy forming.“Let’s think this over,” I said to myself, “and let’s take ourtime. Hunting otters in underwater forests, as we did in the forestsof Crespo Island, is an acceptable activity. But to roam the bottom ofthe sea when you’re almost certain to meet man-eaters in theneighborhood, that’s another story! I know that in certain countries,particularly the Andaman Islands, Negroes don’t hesitate to attacksharks, dagger in one hand and noose in the other; but I also knowthat many who face those fearsome animals don’t come backalive. Besides, I’m not a Negro, and even if I were a Negro, in thisinstance I don’t think a little hesitation on my part would be out ofplace.”And there I was, fantasizing about sharks, envisioning huge jaws armedwith multiple rows of teeth and capable of cutting a man in half. Icould already feel a definite pain around my pelvic girdle. And how Iresented the offhand manner in which the captain had extended hisdeplorable invitation! You would have thought it was an issue of goinginto the woods on some harmless fox hunt!“Thank heavens!” I said to myself. “Conseil will never want to comealong, and that’ll be my excuse for not going with the captain.”As for Ned Land, I admit I felt less confident of his wisdom. Danger,however great, held a perennial attraction for his aggressive nature.I went back to reading Sirr’s book, but I leafed through itmechanically. Between the lines I kept seeing fearsome, wide-openjaws.Just then Conseil and the Canadian entered with a calm, even gleefulair. Little did they know what was waiting for them.“Ye gods, sir!” Ned Land told me. “Your Captain Nemo—the devil takehim—has just made us a very pleasant proposition!”“Oh!” I said. “You know about—”“With all due respect to master,” Conseil replied, “the Nautilus’scommander has invited us, together with master, for a visit tomorrowto Ceylon’s magnificent pearl fisheries. He did so in the most cordialterms and conducted himself like a true gentleman.”“He didn’t tell you anything else?”“Nothing, sir,” the Canadian replied. “He said you’d already discussedthis little stroll.”“Indeed,” I said. “But didn’t he give you any details on—”“Not a one, Mr. Naturalist. You will be going with us, right?”“Me? Why yes, certainly, of course! I can see that you like the idea,Mr. Land.”“Yes! It will be a really unusual experience!”“And possibly dangerous!” I added in an insinuating tone.“Dangerous?” Ned Land replied. “A simple trip to an oysterbank?”Assuredly, Captain Nemo hadn’t seen fit to plant the idea of sharks inthe minds of my companions. For my part, I stared at them with anxiouseyes, as if they were already missing a limb or two. Should I alertthem? Yes, surely, but I hardly knew how to go about it.“Would master,” Conseil said to me, “give us some background on pearlfishing?”“On the fishing itself?” I asked. “Or on the occupational hazardsthat—”“On the fishing,” the Canadian replied. “Before we tackle the terrain,it helps to be familiar with it.”“All right, sit down, my friends, and I’ll teach you everything Imyself have just been taught by the Englishman H. C. Sirr!”Ned and Conseil took seats on a couch, and right off the Canadian saidto me:“Sir, just what is a pearl exactly?”“My gallant Ned,” I replied, “for poets a pearl is a tear from thesea; for Orientals it’s a drop of solidified dew; for the ladies it’sa jewel they can wear on their fingers, necks, and ears that’s oblongin shape, glassy in luster, and formed from mother-of-pearl; forchemists it’s a mixture of calcium phosphate and calcium carbonatewith a little gelatin protein; and finally, for naturalists it’s asimple festering secretion from the organ that producesmother-of-pearl in certain bivalves.”“Branch Mollusca,” Conseil said, “class Acephala, order Testacea.”“Correct, my scholarly Conseil. Now then, those Testacea capable ofproducing pearls include rainbow abalone, turbo snails, giant clams,and saltwater scallops—briefly, all those that secretemother-of-pearl, in other words, that blue, azure, violet, or whitesubstance lining the insides of their valves.”“Are mussels included too?” the Canadian asked.“Yes! The mussels of certain streams in Scotland, Wales, Ireland,Saxony, Bohemia, and France.”“Good!” the Canadian replied. “From now on we’ll pay closer attentionto ’em.”“But,” I went on, “for secreting pearls, the ideal mollusk is thepearl oyster Meleagrina margaritifera, that valuable shellfish. Pearlsresult simply from mother-of-pearl solidifying into a globularshape. Either they stick to the oyster’s shell, or they becomeembedded in the creature’s folds. On the valves a pearl sticks fast;on the flesh it lies loose. But its nucleus is always some small, hardobject, say a sterile egg or a grain of sand, around which themother-of-pearl is deposited in thin, concentric layers over severalyears in succession.”“Can one find several pearls in the same oyster?” Conseil asked.“Yes, my boy. There are some shellfish that turn into real jewelcoffers. They even mention one oyster, about which I remain dubious,that supposedly contained at least 150 sharks.”“150 sharks!” Ned Land yelped.“Did I say sharks?” I exclaimed hastily. “I meant 150 pearls. Sharkswouldn’t make sense.”“Indeed,” Conseil said. “But will master now tell us how one goesabout extracting these pearls?”“One proceeds in several ways, and often when pearls stick to thevalves, fishermen even pull them loose with pliers. But usually theshellfish are spread out on mats made from the esparto grass thatcovers the beaches. Thus they die in the open air, and by the end often days they’ve rotted sufficiently. Next they’re immersed in hugetanks of salt water, then they’re opened up and washed. At this pointthe sorters begin their twofold task. First they remove the layers ofmother-of-pearl, which are known in the industry by the nameslegitimate silver, bastard white, or bastard black, and these areshipped out in cases weighing 125 to 150 kilograms. Then they removethe oyster’s meaty tissue, boil it, and finally strain it, in order toextract even the smallest pearls.”“Do the prices of these pearls differ depending on their size?”Conseil asked.“Not only on their size,” I replied, “but also according to theirshape, their water—in other words, their color—and their orient—inother words, that dappled, shimmering glow that makes them sodelightful to the eye. The finest pearls are called virgin pearls, orparagons; they form in isolation within the mollusk’s tissue. They’rewhite, often opaque but sometimes of opalescent transparency, andusually spherical or pear-shaped. The spherical ones are made intobracelets; the pear-shaped ones into earrings, and since they’re themost valuable, they’re priced individually. The other pearls thatstick to the oyster’s shell are more erratically shaped and are pricedby weight. Finally, classed in the lowest order, the smallest pearlsare known by the name seed pearls; they’re priced by the measuring cupand are used mainly in the creation of embroidery for churchvestments.”“But it must be a long, hard job, sorting out these pearls by size,”the Canadian said.“No, my friend. That task is performed with eleven strainers, orsieves, that are pierced with different numbers of holes. Those pearlsstaying in the strainers with twenty to eighty holes are in the firstorder. Those not slipping through the sieves pierced with 100 to 800holes are in the second order. Finally, those pearls for which oneuses strainers pierced with 900 to 1,000 holes make up the seedpearls.”“How ingenious,” Conseil said, “to reduce dividing and classifyingpearls to a mechanical operation. And could master tell us the profitsbrought in by harvesting these banks of pearl oysters?”“According to Sirr’s book,” I replied, “these Ceylon fisheries arefarmed annually for a total profit of 3,000,000 man-eaters.”“Francs!” Conseil rebuked.“Yes, francs! 3,000,000 francs!” I went on. “But I don’t think thesefisheries bring in the returns they once did. Similarly, the CentralAmerican fisheries used to make an annual profit of 4,000,000 francsduring the reign of King Charles V, but now they bring in onlytwo-thirds of that amount. All in all, it’s estimated that 9,000,000francs is the current yearly return for the whole pearl-harvestingindustry.”“But,” Conseil asked, “haven’t certain famous pearls been quoted atextremely high prices?”“Yes, my boy. They say Julius Caesar gave Servilia a pearl worth120,000 francs in our currency.”“I’ve even heard stories,” the Canadian said, “about some lady inancient times who drank pearls in vinegar.”“Cleopatra,” Conseil shot back.“It must have tasted pretty bad,” Ned Land added.“Abominable, Ned my friend,” Conseil replied. “But when a little glassof vinegar is worth 1,500,000 francs, its taste is a small price topay.”“I’m sorry I didn’t marry the gal,” the Canadian said, throwing up hishands with an air of discouragement.“Ned Land married to Cleopatra?” Conseil exclaimed.“But I was all set to tie the knot, Conseil,” the Canadian replied inall seriousness, “and it wasn’t my fault the whole business fellthrough. I even bought a pearl necklace for my fiancée, Kate Tender,but she married somebody else instead. Well, that necklace cost meonly $1.50, but you can absolutely trust me on this, professor, itspearls were so big, they wouldn’t have gone through that strainer withtwenty holes.”“My gallant Ned,” I replied, laughing, “those were artificial pearls,ordinary glass beads whose insides were coated with Essence ofOrient.”“Wow!” the Canadian replied. “That Essence of Orient must sell forquite a large sum.”“As little as zero! It comes from the scales of a European carp, it’snothing more than a silver substance that collects in the water and ispreserved in ammonia. It’s worthless.”“Maybe that’s why Kate Tender married somebody else,” replied Mr. Landphilosophically.“But,” I said, “getting back to pearls of great value, I don’t thinkany sovereign ever possessed one superior to the pearl owned byCaptain Nemo.”“This one?” Conseil said, pointing to a magnificent jewel in its glasscase.“Exactly. And I’m certainly not far off when I estimate its value at2,000,000 . . . uh . . .”“Francs!” Conseil said quickly.“Yes,” I said, “2,000,000 francs, and no doubt all it cost our captainwas the effort to pick it up.”“Ha!” Ned Land exclaimed. “During our stroll tomorrow, who says wewon’t run into one just like it?”“Bah!” Conseil put in.“And why not?”“What good would a pearl worth millions do us here on the Nautilus?”“Here, no,” Ned Land said. “But elsewhere. . . .”“Oh! Elsewhere!” Conseil put in, shaking his head.“In fact,” I said, “Mr. Land is right. And if we ever brought back toEurope or America a pearl worth millions, it would make the story ofour adventures more authentic—and much more rewarding.”“That’s how I see it,” the Canadian said.“But,” said Conseil, who perpetually returned to the didactic side ofthings, “is this pearl fishing ever dangerous?”“No,” I replied quickly, “especially if one takes certainprecautions.”“What risks would you run in a job like that?” Ned Landsaid. “Swallowing a few gulps of salt water?”“Whatever you say, Ned.” Then, trying to imitate Captain Nemo’scarefree tone, I asked, “By the way, gallant Ned, are you afraid ofsharks?”“Me?” the Canadian replied. “I’m a professional harpooner! It’s my jobto make a mockery of them!”“It isn’t an issue,” I said, “of fishing for them with a swivel hook,hoisting them onto the deck of a ship, chopping off the tail with asweep of the ax, opening the belly, ripping out the heart, and tossingit into the sea.”“So it’s an issue of . . . ?”“Yes, precisely.”“In the water?”“In the water.”“Ye gods, just give me a good harpoon! You see, sir, these sharks arebadly designed. They have to roll their bellies over to snap you up,and in the meantime . . .”Ned Land had a way of pronouncing the word “snap” that sent chillsdown the spine.“Well, how about you, Conseil? What are your feelings about theseman-eaters?”“Me?” Conseil said. “I’m afraid I must be frank with master.”Good for you, I thought.“If master faces these sharks,” Conseil said, “I think his loyalmanservant should face them with him!”CHAPTER 3A Pearl Worth Ten MillionNIGHT FELL. I went to bed. I slept pretty poorly. Man-eaters played amajor role in my dreams. And I found it more or less appropriate thatthe French word for shark, requin, has its linguistic roots in theword requiem.The next day at four o’clock in the morning, I was awakened by thesteward whom Captain Nemo had placed expressly at my service. I got upquickly, dressed, and went into the lounge.Captain Nemo was waiting for me.“Professor Aronnax,” he said to me, “are you ready to start?”“I’m ready.”“Kindly follow me.”“What about my companions, captain?”“They’ve been alerted and are waiting for us.”“Aren’t we going to put on our diving suits?” I asked.“Not yet. I haven’t let the Nautilus pull too near the coast, andwe’re fairly well out from the Mannar oysterbank. But I have the skiffready, and it will take us to the exact spot where we’ll disembark,which will save us a pretty long trek. It’s carrying our divingequipment, and we’ll suit up just before we begin our underwaterexploring.”Captain Nemo took me to the central companionway whose steps led tothe platform. Ned and Conseil were there, enraptured with the“pleasure trip” getting under way. Oars in position, five of theNautilus’s sailors were waiting for us aboard the skiff, which wasmoored alongside. The night was still dark. Layers of clouds cloakedthe sky and left only a few stars in view. My eyes flew to the sidewhere land lay, but I saw only a blurred line covering three-quartersof the horizon from southwest to northwest. Going up Ceylon’s westcoast during the night, the Nautilus lay west of the bay, or ratherthat gulf formed by the mainland and Mannar Island. Under these darkwaters there stretched the bank of shellfish, an inexhaustible fieldof pearls more than twenty miles long.Captain Nemo, Conseil, Ned Land, and I found seats in the stern of theskiff. The longboat’s coxswain took the tiller; his four companionsleaned into their oars; the moorings were cast off and we pulledclear.The skiff headed southward. The oarsmen took their time. I watchedtheir strokes vigorously catch the water, and they always waited tenseconds before rowing again, following the practice used in mostnavies. While the longboat coasted, drops of liquid flicked from theoars and hit the dark troughs of the waves, pitter-pattering likesplashes of molten lead. Coming from well out, a mild swell made theskiff roll gently, and a few cresting billows lapped at its bow.We were silent. What was Captain Nemo thinking? Perhaps that thisapproaching shore was too close for comfort, contrary to theCanadian’s views in which it still seemed too far away. As forConseil, he had come along out of simple curiosity.Near 5:30 the first glimmers of light on the horizon defined the upperlines of the coast with greater distinctness. Fairly flat to the east,it swelled a little toward the south. Five miles still separated itfrom us, and its beach merged with the misty waters. Between us andthe shore, the sea was deserted. Not a boat, not a diver. Profoundsolitude reigned over this gathering place of pearl fishermen. AsCaptain Nemo had commented, we were arriving in these waterways amonth too soon.At six o’clock the day broke suddenly, with that speed unique totropical regions, which experience no real dawn or dusk. The sun’srays pierced the cloud curtain gathered on the easterly horizon, andthe radiant orb rose swiftly.I could clearly see the shore, which featured a few sparse trees hereand there.The skiff advanced toward Mannar Island, which curved to thesouth. Captain Nemo stood up from his thwart and studied the sea.At his signal the anchor was lowered, but its chain barely ran becausethe bottom lay no more than a meter down, and this locality was one ofthe shallowest spots near the bank of shellfish. Instantly the skiffwheeled around under the ebb tide’s outbound thrust.“Here we are, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo then said. “You observethis confined bay? A month from now in this very place, the numerousfishing boats of the harvesters will gather, and these are the waterstheir divers will ransack so daringly. This bay is felicitously laidout for their type of fishing. It’s sheltered from the strongestwinds, and the sea is never very turbulent here, highly favorableconditions for diving work. Now let’s put on our underwater suits, andwe’ll begin our stroll.”I didn’t reply, and while staring at these suspicious waves, I beganto put on my heavy aquatic clothes, helped by the longboat’ssailors. Captain Nemo and my two companions suited up as well. None ofthe Nautilus’s men were to go with us on this new excursion.Soon we were imprisoned up to the neck in india-rubber clothing, andstraps fastened the air devices onto our backs. As for the Ruhmkorffdevice, it didn’t seem to be in the picture. Before inserting my headinto its copper capsule, I commented on this to the captain.“Our lighting equipment would be useless to us,” the captain answeredme. “We won’t be going very deep, and the sun’s rays will besufficient to light our way. Besides, it’s unwise to carry electriclanterns under these waves. Their brightness might unexpectedlyattract certain dangerous occupants of these waterways.”As Captain Nemo pronounced these words, I turned to Conseil and NedLand. But my two friends had already encased their craniums in theirmetal headgear, and they could neither hear nor reply.I had one question left to address to Captain Nemo.“What about our weapons?” I asked him. “Our rifles?”“Rifles! What for? Don’t your mountaineers attack bears dagger inhand? And isn’t steel surer than lead? Here’s a sturdy blade. Slip itunder your belt and let’s be off.”I stared at my companions. They were armed in the same fashion, andNed Land was also brandishing an enormous harpoon he had stowed in theskiff before leaving the Nautilus.Then, following the captain’s example, I let myself be crowned with myheavy copper sphere, and our air tanks immediately went into action.An instant later, the longboat’s sailors helped us overboard one afterthe other, and we set foot on level sand in a meter and a half ofwater. Captain Nemo gave us a hand signal. We followed him down agentle slope and disappeared under the waves.There the obsessive fears in my brain left me. I became surprisinglycalm again. The ease with which I could move increased my confidence,and the many strange sights captivated my imagination.The sun was already sending sufficient light under these waves. Thetiniest objects remained visible. After ten minutes of walking, wewere in five meters of water, and the terrain had become almost flat.Like a covey of snipe over a marsh, there rose underfoot schools ofunusual fish from the genus Monopterus, whose members have no fin buttheir tail. I recognized the Javanese eel, a genuine eight-decimeterserpent with a bluish gray belly, which, without the gold lines overits flanks, could easily be confused with the conger eel. From thebutterfish genus, whose oval bodies are very flat, I observed severaladorned in brilliant colors and sporting a dorsal fin like a sickle,edible fish that, when dried and marinated, make an excellent dishknown by the name “karawade”; then some sea poachers, fish belongingto the genus Aspidophoroides, whose bodies are covered with scalyarmor divided into eight lengthwise sections.Meanwhile, as the sun got progressively higher, it lit up the waterymass more and more. The seafloor changed little by little. Itsfine-grained sand was followed by a genuine causeway of smooth cragscovered by a carpet of mollusks and zoophytes. Among other specimensin these two branches, I noted some windowpane oysters with thinvalves of unequal size, a type of ostracod unique to the Red Sea andthe Indian Ocean, then orange-hued lucina with circular shells,awl-shaped auger shells, some of those Persian murex snails thatsupply the Nautilus with such wonderful dye, spiky periwinkles fifteencentimeters long that rose under the waves like hands ready to grabyou, turban snails with shells made of horn and bristling all overwith spines, lamp shells, edible duck clams that feed the Hindumarketplace, subtly luminous jellyfish of the species Pelagiapanopyra, and finally some wonderful Oculina flabelliforma,magnificent sea fans that fashion one of the most luxuriant tree formsin this ocean.In the midst of this moving vegetation, under arbors of water plants,there raced legions of clumsy articulates, in particular some fangedfrog crabs whose carapaces form a slightly rounded triangle, robbercrabs exclusive to these waterways, and horrible parthenope crabswhose appearance was repulsive to the eye. One animal no less hideous,which I encountered several times, was the enormous crab thatMr. Darwin observed, to which nature has given the instinct andrequisite strength to eat coconuts; it scrambles up trees on the beachand sends the coconuts tumbling; they fracture in their fall and areopened by its powerful pincers. Here, under these clear waves, thiscrab raced around with matchless agility, while green turtles from thespecies frequenting the Malabar coast moved sluggishly among thecrumbling rocks.Near seven o’clock we finally surveyed the bank of shellfish, wherepearl oysters reproduce by the millions. These valuable mollusks stickto rocks, where they’re strongly attached by a mass of brown filamentsthat forbids their moving about. In this respect oysters are inferioreven to mussels, to whom nature has not denied all talent forlocomotion.The shellfish Meleagrina, that womb for pearls whose valves are nearlyequal in size, has the shape of a round shell with thick walls and avery rough exterior. Some of these shells were furrowed with flaky,greenish bands that radiated down from the top. These were the youngoysters. The others had rugged black surfaces, measured up to fifteencentimeters in width, and were ten or more years old.Captain Nemo pointed to this prodigious heap of shellfish, and I sawthat these mines were genuinely inexhaustible, since nature’s creativepowers are greater than man’s destructive instincts. True to thoseinstincts, Ned Land greedily stuffed the finest of these mollusks intoa net he carried at his side.But we couldn’t stop. We had to follow the captain, who headed downtrails seemingly known only to himself. The seafloor rose noticeably,and when I lifted my arms, sometimes they would pass above the surfaceof the sea. Then the level of the oysterbank would lowerunpredictably. Often we went around tall, pointed rocks rising likepyramids. In their dark crevices huge crustaceans, aiming their longlegs like heavy artillery, watched us with unblinking eyes, whileunderfoot there crept millipedes, bloodworms, aricia worms, andannelid worms, whose antennas and tubular tentacles were incrediblylong.Just then a huge cave opened up in our path, hollowed from apicturesque pile of rocks whose smooth heights were completely hungwith underwater flora. At first this cave looked pitch-black tome. Inside, the sun’s rays seemed to diminish by degrees. Their hazytransparency was nothing more than drowned light.Captain Nemo went in. We followed him. My eyes soon grew accustomed tothis comparative gloom. I distinguished the unpredictably contouredspringings of a vault, supported by natural pillars firmly based on agranite foundation, like the weighty columns of Tuscanarchitecture. Why had our incomprehensible guide taken us into thedepths of this underwater crypt? I would soon find out.After going down a fairly steep slope, our feet trod the floor of asort of circular pit. There Captain Nemo stopped, and his handindicated an object that I hadn’t yet noticed.It was an oyster of extraordinary dimensions, a titanic giant clam, aholy-water font that could have held a whole lake, a basin more thantwo meters wide, hence even bigger than the one adorning theNautilus’s lounge.I approached this phenomenal mollusk. Its mass of filaments attachedit to a table of granite, and there it grew by itself in the midst ofthe cave’s calm waters. I estimated the weight of this giant clam at300 kilograms. Hence such an oyster held fifteen kilos of meat, andyou’d need the stomach of King Gargantua to eat a couple dozen.Captain Nemo was obviously familiar with this bivalve’sexistence. This wasn’t the first time he’d paid it a visit, and Ithought his sole reason for leading us to this locality was to show usa natural curiosity. I was mistaken. Captain Nemo had an explicitpersonal interest in checking on the current condition of this giantclam.The mollusk’s two valves were partly open. The captain approached andstuck his dagger vertically between the shells to discourage any ideasabout closing; then with his hands he raised the fringed,membrane-filled tunic that made up the animal’s mantle.There, between its leaflike folds, I saw a loose pearl as big as acoconut. Its globular shape, perfect clarity, and wonderful orientmade it a jewel of incalculable value. Carried away by curiosity, Istretched out my hand to take it, weigh it, fondle it! But the captainstopped me, signaled no, removed his dagger in one swift motion, andlet the two valves snap shut.I then understood Captain Nemo’s intent. By leaving the pearl buriedbeneath the giant clam’s mantle, he allowed it to growimperceptibly. With each passing year the mollusk’s secretions addednew concentric layers. The captain alone was familiar with the cavewhere this wonderful fruit of nature was “ripening”; he alone rearedit, so to speak, in order to transfer it one day to his dearly belovedmuseum. Perhaps, following the examples of oyster farmers in China andIndia, he had even predetermined the creation of this pearl bysticking under the mollusk’s folds some piece of glass or metal thatwas gradually covered with mother-of-pearl. In any case, comparingthis pearl to others I already knew about, and to those shimmering inthe captain’s collection, I estimated that it was worth at least10,000,000 francs. It was a superb natural curiosity rather than aluxurious piece of jewelry, because I don’t know of any female earthat could handle it.Our visit to this opulent giant clam came to an end. Captain Nemo leftthe cave, and we climbed back up the bank of shellfish in the midst ofthese clear waters not yet disturbed by divers at work.We walked by ourselves, genuine loiterers stopping or straying as ourfancies dictated. For my part, I was no longer worried about thosedangers my imagination had so ridiculously exaggerated. The shallowsdrew noticeably closer to the surface of the sea, and soon, walking inonly a meter of water, my head passed well above the level of theocean. Conseil rejoined me, and gluing his huge copper capsule tomine, his eyes gave me a friendly greeting. But this lofty plateaumeasured only a few fathoms, and soon we reentered Our Element. Ithink I’ve now earned the right to dub it that.Ten minutes later, Captain Nemo stopped suddenly. I thought he’dcalled a halt so that we could turn and start back. No. With a gesturehe ordered us to crouch beside him at the foot of a wide crevice. Hishand motioned toward a spot within the liquid mass, and I lookedcarefully.Five meters away a shadow appeared and dropped to the seafloor. Thealarming idea of sharks crossed my mind. But I was mistaken, and onceagain we didn’t have to deal with monsters of the deep.It was a man, a living man, a black Indian fisherman, a poor devil whono doubt had come to gather what he could before harvest time. I sawthe bottom of his dinghy, moored a few feet above his head. He woulddive and go back up in quick succession. A stone cut in the shape of asugar loaf, which he gripped between his feet while a rope connectedit to his boat, served to lower him more quickly to the oceanfloor. This was the extent of his equipment. Arriving on the seafloorat a depth of about five meters, he fell to his knees and stuffed hissack with shellfish gathered at random. Then he went back up, emptiedhis sack, pulled up his stone, and started all over again, the wholeprocess lasting only thirty seconds.This diver didn’t see us. A shadow cast by our crag hid us from hisview. And besides, how could this poor Indian ever have guessed thathuman beings, creatures like himself, were near him under the waters,eavesdropping on his movements, not missing a single detail of hisfishing!So he went up and down several times. He gathered only about tenshellfish per dive, because he had to tear them from the banks whereeach clung with its tough mass of filaments. And how many of theseoysters for which he risked his life would have no pearl in them!I observed him with great care. His movements were systematicallyexecuted, and for half an hour no danger seemed to threaten him. So Ihad gotten used to the sight of this fascinating fishing when all atonce, just as the Indian was kneeling on the seafloor, I saw him makea frightened gesture, stand, and gather himself to spring back to thesurface of the waves.I understood his fear. A gigantic shadow appeared above the poordiver. It was a shark of huge size, moving in diagonally, eyes ablaze,jaws wide open!I was speechless with horror, unable to make a single movement.With one vigorous stroke of its fins, the voracious animal shot towardthe Indian, who jumped aside and avoided the shark’s bite but not thethrashing of its tail, because that tail struck him across the chestand stretched him out on the seafloor.This scene lasted barely a few seconds. The shark returned, rolledover on its back, and was getting ready to cut the Indian in half,when Captain Nemo, who was stationed beside me, suddenly stoodup. Then he strode right toward the monster, dagger in hand, ready tofight it at close quarters.Just as it was about to snap up the poor fisherman, the man-eater sawits new adversary, repositioned itself on its belly, and headedswiftly toward him.I can see Captain Nemo’s bearing to this day. Bracing himself, hewaited for the fearsome man-eater with wonderful composure, and whenthe latter rushed at him, the captain leaped aside with prodigiousquickness, avoided a collision, and sank his dagger into itsbelly. But that wasn’t the end of the story. A dreadful battle wasjoined.The shark bellowed, so to speak. Blood was pouring into the waves fromits wounds. The sea was dyed red, and through this opaque liquid Icould see nothing else.Nothing else until the moment when, through a rift in the clouds, Isaw the daring captain clinging to one of the animal’s fins, fightingthe monster at close quarters, belaboring his enemy’s belly with stabsof the dagger yet unable to deliver the deciding thrust, in otherwords, a direct hit to the heart. In its struggles the man-eaterchurned the watery mass so furiously, its eddies threatened to knockme over.I wanted to run to the captain’s rescue. But I was transfixed withhorror, unable to move.I stared, wild-eyed. I saw the fight enter a new phase. The captainfell to the seafloor, toppled by the enormous mass weighing himdown. Then the shark’s jaws opened astoundingly wide, like a pair ofindustrial shears, and that would have been the finish of Captain Nemohad not Ned Land, quick as thought, rushed forward with his harpoonand driven its dreadful point into the shark’s underside.The waves were saturated with masses of blood. The waters shook withthe movements of the man-eater, which thrashed about withindescribable fury. Ned Land hadn’t missed his target. This was themonster’s death rattle. Pierced to the heart, it was struggling withdreadful spasms whose aftershocks knocked Conseil off his feet.Meanwhile Ned Land pulled the captain clear. Uninjured, the latterstood up, went right to the Indian, quickly cut the rope binding theman to his stone, took the fellow in his arms, and with a vigorouskick of the heel, rose to the surface of the sea.The three of us followed him, and a few moments later, miraculouslysafe, we reached the fisherman’s longboat.Captain Nemo’s first concern was to revive this unfortunate man. Iwasn’t sure he would succeed. I hoped so, since the poor devil hadn’tbeen under very long. But that stroke from the shark’s tail could havebeen his deathblow.Fortunately, after vigorous massaging by Conseil and the captain, Isaw the nearly drowned man regain consciousness little by little. Heopened his eyes. How startled he must have felt, how frightened even,at seeing four huge, copper craniums leaning over him!And above all, what must he have thought when Captain Nemo pulled abag of pearls from a pocket in his diving suit and placed it in thefisherman’s hands? This magnificent benefaction from the Man of theWaters to the poor Indian from Ceylon was accepted by the latter withtrembling hands. His bewildered eyes indicated that he didn’t know towhat superhuman creatures he owed both his life and his fortune.At the captain’s signal we returned to the bank of shellfish, andretracing our steps, we walked for half an hour until we encounteredthe anchor connecting the seafloor with the Nautilus’s skiff.Back on board, the sailors helped divest us of our heavy coppercarapaces.Captain Nemo’s first words were spoken to the Canadian.“Thank you, Mr. Land,” he told him.“Tit for tat, captain,” Ned Land replied. “I owed it to you.”The ghost of a smile glided across the captain’s lips, and that wasall.“To the Nautilus,” he said.The longboat flew over the waves. A few minutes later we encounteredthe shark’s corpse again, floating.From the black markings on the tips of its fins, I recognized thedreadful Squalus melanopterus from the seas of the East Indies, avariety in the species of sharks proper. It was more than twenty-fivefeet long; its enormous mouth occupied a third of its body. It was anadult, as could be seen from the six rows of teeth forming anisosceles triangle in its upper jaw.Conseil looked at it with purely scientific fascination, and I’m surehe placed it, not without good reason, in the class of cartilaginousfish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills, family Selacia, genusSqualus.While I was contemplating this inert mass, suddenly a dozen of thesevoracious melanoptera appeared around our longboat; but, paying noattention to us, they pounced on the corpse and quarreled over everyscrap of it.By 8:30 we were back on board the Nautilus.There I fell to thinking about the incidents that marked our excursionover the Mannar oysterbank. Two impressions inevitably stood out. Oneconcerned Captain Nemo’s matchless bravery, the other his devotion toa human being, a representative of that race from which he had fledbeneath the seas. In spite of everything, this strange man hadn’t yetsucceeded in completely stifling his heart.When I shared these impressions with him, he answered me in a tonetouched with emotion:“That Indian, professor, lives in the land of the oppressed, and I amto this day, and will be until my last breath, a native of that sameland!”CHAPTER 4The Red SeaDURING THE DAY of January 29, the island of Ceylon disappeared belowthe horizon, and at a speed of twenty miles per hour, the Nautilusglided into the labyrinthine channels that separate the Maldive andLaccadive Islands. It likewise hugged Kiltan Island, a shore ofmadreporic origin discovered by Vasco da Gama in 1499 and one ofnineteen chief islands in the island group of the Laccadives, locatedbetween latitude 10 degrees and 14 degrees 30’ north, and betweenlongitude 50 degrees 72’ and 69 degrees east.By then we had fared 16,220 miles, or 7,500 leagues, from our startingpoint in the seas of Japan.The next day, January 30, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of theocean, there was no more land in sight. Setting its course to thenorth-northwest, the ship headed toward the Gulf of Oman, carved outbetween Arabia and the Indian peninsula and providing access to thePersian Gulf.This was obviously a blind alley with no possible outlet. So where wasCaptain Nemo taking us? I was unable to say. Which didn’t satisfy theCanadian, who that day asked me where we were going.“We’re going, Mr. Ned, where the captain’s fancy takes us.”“His fancy,” the Canadian replied, “won’t take us very far. ThePersian Gulf has no outlet, and if we enter those waters, it won’t belong before we return in our tracks.”“All right, we’ll return, Mr. Land, and after the Persian Gulf, if theNautilus wants to visit the Red Sea, the Strait of Bab el Mandeb isstill there to let us in!”“I don’t have to tell you, sir,” Ned Land replied, “that the Red Seais just as landlocked as the gulf, since the Isthmus of Suez hasn’tbeen cut all the way through yet; and even if it was, a boat assecretive as ours wouldn’t risk a canal intersected with locks. So theRed Sea won’t be our way back to Europe either.”“But I didn’t say we’d return to Europe.”“What do you figure, then?”“I figure that after visiting these unusual waterways of Arabia andEgypt, the Nautilus will go back down to the Indian Ocean, perhapsthrough Mozambique Channel, perhaps off the Mascarene Islands, andthen make for the Cape of Good Hope.”“And once we’re at the Cape of Good Hope?” the Canadian asked withtypical persistence.“Well then, we’ll enter that Atlantic Ocean with which we aren’t yetfamiliar. What’s wrong, Ned my friend? Are you tired of this voyageunder the seas? Are you bored with the constantly changing sight ofthese underwater wonders? Speaking for myself, I’ll be extremelydistressed to see the end of a voyage so few men will ever have achance to make.”“But don’t you realize, Professor Aronnax,” the Canadian replied,“that soon we’ll have been imprisoned for three whole months aboardthis Nautilus?”“No, Ned, I didn’t realize it, I don’t want to realize it, and I don’tkeep track of every day and every hour.”“But when will it be over?”“In its appointed time. Meanwhile there’s nothing we can do about it,and our discussions are futile. My gallant Ned, if you come and tellme, ‘A chance to escape is available to us,’ then I’ll discuss it withyou. But that isn’t the case, and in all honesty, I don’t thinkCaptain Nemo ever ventures into European seas.”This short dialogue reveals that in my mania for the Nautilus, I wasturning into the spitting image of its commander.As for Ned Land, he ended our talk in his best speechifying style:“That’s all fine and dandy. But in my humble opinion, a life in jailis a life without joy.”For four days until February 3, the Nautilus inspected the Gulf ofOman at various speeds and depths. It seemed to be traveling atrandom, as if hesitating over which course to follow, but it nevercrossed the Tropic of Cancer.After leaving this gulf we raised Muscat for an instant, the mostimportant town in the country of Oman. I marveled at its strangeappearance in the midst of the black rocks surrounding it, againstwhich the white of its houses and forts stood out sharply. I spottedthe rounded domes of its mosques, the elegant tips of its minarets,and its fresh, leafy terraces. But it was only a fleeting vision, andthe Nautilus soon sank beneath the dark waves of these waterways.Then our ship went along at a distance of six miles from the Arabiccoasts of Mahra and Hadhramaut, their undulating lines of mountainsrelieved by a few ancient ruins. On February 5 we finally put into theGulf of Aden, a genuine funnel stuck into the neck of Bab el Mandeband bottling these Indian waters in the Red Sea.On February 6 the Nautilus cruised in sight of the city of Aden,perched on a promontory connected to the continent by a narrowisthmus, a sort of inaccessible Gibraltar whose fortifications theEnglish rebuilt after capturing it in 1839. I glimpsed the octagonalminarets of this town, which used to be one of the wealthiest, busiestcommercial centers along this coast, as the Arab historian Idrisitells it.I was convinced that when Captain Nemo reached this point, he wouldback out again; but I was mistaken, and much to my surprise, he didnothing of the sort.The next day, February 7, we entered the Strait of Bab el Mandeb,whose name means “Gate of Tears” in the Arabic language. Twenty mileswide, it’s only fifty-two kilometers long, and with the Nautiluslaunched at full speed, clearing it was the work of barely anhour. But I didn’t see a thing, not even Perim Island where theBritish government built fortifications to strengthen Aden’sposition. There were many English and French steamers plowing thisnarrow passageway, liners going from Suez to Bombay, Calcutta,Melbourne, Réunion Island, and Mauritius; far too much traffic for theNautilus to make an appearance on the surface. So it wisely stayed inmidwater.Finally, at noon, we were plowing the waves of the Red Sea.The Red Sea: that great lake so famous in biblical traditions, seldomreplenished by rains, fed by no important rivers, continually drainedby a high rate of evaporation, its water level dropping a meter and ahalf every year! If it were fully landlocked like a lake, this oddgulf might dry up completely; on this score it’s inferior to itsneighbors, the Caspian Sea and the Dead Sea, whose levels lower onlyto the point where their evaporation exactly equals the amounts ofwater they take to their hearts.This Red Sea is 2,600 kilometers long with an average width of 240. Inthe days of thePtolemies and the Roman emperors, it was a great commercial artery forthe world, and when its isthmus has been cut through, it willcompletely regain that bygone importance that the Suez railways havealready brought back in part.I would not even attempt to understand the whim that induced CaptainNemo to take us into this gulf. But I wholeheartedly approved of theNautilus’s entering it. It adopted a medium pace, sometimes staying onthe surface, sometimes diving to avoid some ship, and so I couldobserve both the inside and topside of this highly unusual sea.On February 8, as early as the first hours of daylight, Mocha appearedbefore us: a town now in ruins, whose walls would collapse at the meresound of a cannon, and which shelters a few leafy date trees here andthere. This once-important city used to contain six publicmarketplaces plus twenty-six mosques, and its walls, protected byfourteen forts, fashioned a three-kilometer girdle around it.Then the Nautilus drew near the beaches of Africa, where the sea isconsiderably deeper. There, through the open panels and in a midwaterof crystal clarity, our ship enabled us to study wonderful bushes ofshining coral and huge chunks of rock wrapped in splendid green fursof algae and fucus. What an indescribable sight, and what a variety ofsettings and scenery where these reefs and volcanic islands leveledoff by the Libyan coast! But soon the Nautilus hugged the easternshore where these tree forms appeared in all their glory. This was offthe coast of Tihama, and there such zoophyte displays not onlyflourished below sea level but they also fashioned picturesquenetworks that unreeled as high as ten fathoms above it; the latterwere more whimsical but less colorful than the former, which kepttheir bloom thanks to the moist vitality of the waters.How many delightful hours I spent in this way at the lounge window!How many new specimens of underwater flora and fauna I marveled atbeneath the light of our electric beacon! Mushroom-shaped funguscoral, some slate-colored sea anemone including the speciesThalassianthus aster among others, organ-pipe coral arranged likeflutes and just begging for a puff from the god Pan, shells unique tothis sea that dwell in madreporic cavities and whose bases are twistedinto squat spirals, and finally a thousand samples of a polypary Ihadn’t observed until then: the common sponge.First division in the polyp group, the class Spongiaria has beencreated by scientists precisely for this unusual exhibit whoseusefulness is beyond dispute. The sponge is definitely not a plant, assome naturalists still believe, but an animal of the lowest order, apolypary inferior even to coral. Its animal nature isn’t in doubt, andwe can’t accept even the views of the ancients, who regarded it ashalfway between plant and animal. But I must say that naturalists arenot in agreement on the structural mode of sponges. For some it’s apolypary, and for others, such as Professor Milne-Edwards, it’s asingle, solitary individual.The class Spongiaria contains about 300 species that are encounteredin a large number of seas and even in certain streams, where they’vebeen given the name freshwater sponges. But their waters of choice arethe Red Sea and the Mediterranean near the Greek Islands or the coastof Syria. These waters witness the reproduction and growth of soft,delicate bath sponges whose prices run as high as 150 francs apiece:the yellow sponge from Syria, the horn sponge from Barbary, etc. Butsince I had no hope of studying these zoophytes in the seaports of theLevant, from which we were separated by the insuperable Isthmus ofSuez, I had to be content with observing them in the waters of the RedSea.So I called Conseil to my side, while at an average depth of eight tonine meters, the Nautilus slowly skimmed every beautiful rock on theeasterly coast.There sponges grew in every shape, globular, stalklike, leaflike,fingerlike. With reasonable accuracy, they lived up to their nicknamesof basket sponges, chalice sponges, distaff sponges, elkhorn sponges,lion’s paws, peacock’s tails, and Neptune’s gloves—designationsbestowed on them by fishermen, more poetically inclined thanscientists. A gelatinous, semifluid substance coated the fibroustissue of these sponges, and from this tissue there escaped a steadytrickle of water that, after carrying sustenance to each cell, wasbeing expelled by a contracting movement. This jellylike substancedisappears when the polyp dies, emitting ammonia as it rots. Finallynothing remains but the fibers, either gelatinous or made of horn,that constitute your household sponge, which takes on a russet hue andis used for various tasks depending on its degree of elasticity,permeability, or resistance to saturation.These polyparies were sticking to rocks, shells of mollusks, and eventhe stalks of water plants. They adorned the smallest crevices, somesprawling, others standing or hanging like coral outgrowths. I toldConseil that sponges are fished up in two ways, either by dragnet orby hand. The latter method calls for the services of a diver, but it’spreferable because it spares the polypary’s tissue, leaving it with amuch higher market value.Other zoophytes swarming near the sponges consisted chiefly of a veryelegant species of jellyfish; mollusks were represented by varietiesof squid that, according to Professor Orbigny, are unique to the RedSea; and reptiles by virgata turtles belonging to the genus Chelonia,which furnished our table with a dainty but wholesome dish.As for fish, they were numerous and often remarkable. Here are theones that the Nautilus’s nets most frequently hauled on board: rays,including spotted rays that were oval in shape and brick red in color,their bodies strewn with erratic blue speckles and identifiable bytheir jagged double stings, silver-backed skates, common stingrayswith stippled tails, butterfly rays that looked like huge two-metercloaks flapping at middepth, toothless guitarfish that were a type ofcartilaginous fish closer to the shark, trunkfish known as dromedariesthat were one and a half feet long and had humps ending inbackward-curving stings, serpentine moray eels with silver tails andbluish backs plus brown pectorals trimmed in gray piping, a species ofbutterfish called the fiatola decked out in thin gold stripes and thethree colors of the French flag, Montague blennies four decimeterslong, superb jacks handsomely embellished by seven black crosswisestreaks with blue and yellow fins plus gold and silver scales, snooks,standard mullet with yellow heads, parrotfish, wrasse, triggerfish,gobies, etc., plus a thousand other fish common to the oceans we hadalready crossed.On February 9 the Nautilus cruised in the widest part of the Red Sea,measuring 190 miles straight across from Suakin on the west coast toQunfidha on the east coast.At noon that day after our position fix, Captain Nemo climbed onto theplatform, where I happened to be. I vowed not to let him go belowagain without at least sounding him out on his future plans. As soonas he saw me, he came over, graciously offered me a cigar, and said tome:“Well, professor, are you pleased with this Red Sea? Have you seenenough of its hidden wonders, its fish and zoophytes, its gardens ofsponges and forests of coral? Have you glimpsed the towns built on itsshores?”“Yes, Captain Nemo,” I replied, “and the Nautilus is wonderfullysuited to this whole survey. Ah, it’s a clever boat!”“Yes, sir, clever, daring, and invulnerable! It fears neither the RedSea’s dreadful storms nor its currents and reefs.”“Indeed,” I said, “this sea is mentioned as one of the worst, and inthe days of the ancients, if I’m not mistaken, it had an abominablereputation.”“Thoroughly abominable, Professor Aronnax. The Greek and Latinhistorians can find nothing to say in its favor, and the Greekgeographer Strabo adds that it’s especially rough during the rainyseason and the period of summer prevailing winds. The Arab Idrisi,referring to it by the name Gulf of Colzoum, relates that shipsperished in large numbers on its sandbanks and that no one riskednavigating it by night. This, he claims, is a sea subject to fearfulhurricanes, strewn with inhospitable islands, and ‘with nothing goodto offer,’ either on its surface or in its depths. As a matter offact, the same views can also be found in Arrian, Agatharchides, andArtemidorus.”“One can easily see,” I answered, “that those historians didn’tnavigate aboard the Nautilus.”“Indeed,” the captain replied with a smile, “and in this respect, themoderns aren’t much farther along than the ancients. It took manycenturies to discover the mechanical power of steam! Who knows whetherwe’ll see a second Nautilus within the next 100 years! Progress isslow, Professor Aronnax.”“It’s true,” I replied. “Your ship is a century ahead of its time,perhaps several centuries. It would be most unfortunate if such asecret were to die with its inventor!”Captain Nemo did not reply. After some minutes of silence:“We were discussing,” he said, “the views of ancient historians on thedangers of navigating this Red Sea?”“True,” I replied. “But weren’t their fears exaggerated?”“Yes and no, Professor Aronnax,” answered Captain Nemo, who seemed toknow “his Red Sea” by heart. “To a modern ship, well rigged, solidlyconstructed, and in control of its course thanks to obedient steam,some conditions are no longer hazardous that offered all sorts ofdangers to the vessels of the ancients. Picture those early navigatorsventuring forth in sailboats built from planks lashed together withpalm-tree ropes, caulked with powdered resin, and coated with dogfishgrease. They didn’t even have instruments for taking their bearings,they went by guesswork in the midst of currents they barelyknew. Under such conditions, shipwrecks had to be numerous. Butnowadays steamers providing service between Suez and the South Seashave nothing to fear from the fury of this gulf, despite the contrarywinds of its monsoons. Their captains and passengers no longer preparefor departure with sacrifices to placate the gods, and afterreturning, they don’t traipse in wreaths and gold ribbons to saythanks at the local temple.”“Agreed,” I said. “And steam seems to have killed off all gratitude inseamen’s hearts. But since you seem to have made a special study ofthis sea, captain, can you tell me how it got its name?”“Many explanations exist on the subject, Professor Aronnax. Would youlike to hear the views of one chronicler in the 14th century?”“Gladly.”“This fanciful fellow claims the sea was given its name after thecrossing of the Israelites, when the Pharaoh perished in those wavesthat came together again at Moses’ command:To mark that miraculous sequel, the sea turned a red without equal.Thus no other course would do but to name it for its hue.”“An artistic explanation, Captain Nemo,” I replied, “but I’m unable torest content with it. So I’ll ask you for your own personal views.”“Here they come. To my thinking, Professor Aronnax, this ‘Red Sea’designation must be regarded as a translation of the Hebrew word‘Edrom,’ and if the ancients gave it that name, it was because of theunique color of its waters.”“Until now, however, I’ve seen only clear waves, without any uniquehue.”“Surely, but as we move ahead to the far end of this gulf, you’ll noteits odd appearance. I recall seeing the bay of El Tur completely red,like a lake of blood.”“And you attribute this color to the presence of microscopic algae?”“Yes. It’s a purplish, mucilaginous substance produced by those tinybuds known by the name trichodesmia, 40,000 of which are needed tooccupy the space of one square millimeter. Perhaps you’ll encounterthem when we reach El Tur.”“Hence, Captain Nemo, this isn’t the first time you’ve gone throughthe Red Sea aboard the Nautilus?”“No, sir.”“Then, since you’ve already mentioned the crossing of the Israelitesand the catastrophe that befell the Egyptians, I would ask if you’veever discovered any traces under the waters of that great historicevent?”“No, professor, and for an excellent reason.”“What’s that?”“It’s because that same locality where Moses crossed with all hispeople is now so clogged with sand, camels can barely get their legswet. You can understand that my Nautilus wouldn’t have enough waterfor itself.”“And that locality is . . . ?” I asked.“That locality lies a little above Suez in a sound that used to form adeep estuary when the Red Sea stretched as far as the BitterLakes. Now, whether or not their crossing was literally miraculous,the Israelites did cross there in returning to the Promised Land, andthe Pharaoh’s army did perish at precisely that locality. So I thinkthat excavating those sands would bring to light a great many weaponsand tools of Egyptian origin.”“Obviously,” I replied. “And for the sake of archaeology, let’s hopethat sooner or later such excavations do take place, once new townsare settled on the isthmus after the Suez Canal has been cut through—acanal, by the way, of little use to a ship such as the Nautilus!”“Surely, but of great use to the world at large,” Captain Nemosaid. “The ancients well understood the usefulness to commerce ofconnecting the Red Sea with the Mediterranean, but they never dreamedof cutting a canal between the two, and instead they picked the Nileas their link. If we can trust tradition, it was probably Egypt’s KingSesostris who started digging the canal needed to join the Nile withthe Red Sea. What’s certain is that in 615 B.C. King Necho II was hardat work on a canal that was fed by Nile water and ran through theEgyptian plains opposite Arabia. This canal could be traveled in fourdays, and it was so wide, two triple-tiered galleys could pass throughit abreast. Its construction was continued by Darius the Great, son ofHystaspes, and probably completed by King Ptolemy II. Strabo saw itused for shipping; but the weakness of its slope between its startingpoint, near Bubastis, and the Red Sea left it navigable only a fewmonths out of the year. This canal served commerce until the centuryof Rome’s Antonine emperors; it was then abandoned and covered withsand, subsequently reinstated by Arabia’s Caliph Omar I, and finallyfilled in for good in 761 or 762 A.D. by Caliph Al-Mansur, in aneffort to prevent supplies from reaching Mohammed ibn Abdullah, whohad rebelled against him. During his Egyptian campaign, your GeneralNapoleon Bonaparte discovered traces of this old canal in the Suezdesert, and when the tide caught him by surprise, he wellnigh perishedjust a few hours before rejoining his regiment at Hadjaroth, the veryplace where Moses had pitched camp 3,300 years before him.”“Well, captain, what the ancients hesitated to undertake, Mr. deLesseps is now finishing up; his joining of these two seas willshorten the route from Cadiz to the East Indies by 9,000 kilometers,and he’ll soon change Africa into an immense island.”“Yes, Professor Aronnax, and you have every right to be proud of yourfellow countryman. Such a man brings a nation more honor than thegreatest commanders! Like so many others, he began with difficultiesand setbacks, but he triumphed because he has the volunteerspirit. And it’s sad to think that this deed, which should have beenan international deed, which would have insured that anyadministration went down in history, will succeed only through theefforts of one man. So all hail to Mr. de Lesseps!”“Yes, all hail to that great French citizen,” I replied, quitestartled by how emphatically Captain Nemo had just spoken.“Unfortunately,” he went on, “I can’t take you through that SuezCanal, but the day after tomorrow, you’ll be able to see the longjetties of Port Said when we’re in the Mediterranean.”“In the Mediterranean!” I exclaimed.“Yes, professor. Does that amaze you?”“What amazes me is thinking we’ll be there the day after tomorrow.”“Oh really?”“Yes, captain, although since I’ve been aboard your vessel, I shouldhave formed the habit of not being amazed by anything!”“But what is it that startles you?”“The thought of how hideously fast the Nautilus will need to go, ifit’s to double the Cape of Good Hope, circle around Africa, and lie inthe open Mediterranean by the day after tomorrow.”“And who says it will circle Africa, professor? What’s this talk aboutdoubling the Cape of Good Hope?”“But unless the Nautilus navigates on dry land and crosses over theisthmus—”“Or under it, Professor Aronnax.”“Under it?”“Surely,” Captain Nemo replied serenely. “Under that tongue of land,nature long ago made what man today is making on its surface.”“What! There’s a passageway?”“Yes, an underground passageway that I’ve named the Arabian Tunnel. Itstarts below Suez and leads to the Bay of Pelusium.”“But isn’t that isthmus only composed of quicksand?”“To a certain depth. But at merely fifty meters, one encounters a firmfoundation of rock.”“And it’s by luck that you discovered this passageway?” I asked, moreand more startled.“Luck plus logic, professor, and logic even more than luck.”“Captain, I hear you, but I can’t believe my ears.”“Oh, sir! The old saying still holds good: Aures habent et nonaudient!* Not only does this passageway exist, but I’ve takenadvantage of it on several occasions. Without it, I wouldn’t haveventured today into such a blind alley as the Red Sea.”*Latin: “They have ears but hear not.” Ed.“Is it indiscreet to ask how you discovered this tunnel?”“Sir,” the captain answered me, “there can be no secrets between menwho will never leave each other.”I ignored this innuendo and waited for Captain Nemo’s explanation.“Professor,” he told me, “the simple logic of the naturalist led me todiscover this passageway, and I alone am familiar with it. I’d notedthat in the Red Sea and the Mediterranean there exist a number ofabsolutely identical species of fish: eels, butterfish, greenfish,bass, jewelfish, flying fish. Certain of this fact, I wondered ifthere weren’t a connection between the two seas. If there were, itsunderground current had to go from the Red Sea to the Mediterraneansimply because of their difference in level. So I caught a largenumber of fish in the vicinity of Suez. I slipped copper rings aroundtheir tails and tossed them back into the sea. A few months later offthe coast of Syria, I recaptured a few specimens of my fish, adornedwith their telltale rings. So this proved to me that some connectionexisted between the two seas. I searched for it with my Nautilus, Idiscovered it, I ventured into it; and soon, professor, you also willhave cleared my Arabic tunnel!”CHAPTER 5Arabian TunnelTHE SAME DAY, I reported to Conseil and Ned Land that part of theforegoing conversation directly concerning them. When I told them wewould be lying in Mediterranean waters within two days, Conseilclapped his hands, but the Canadian shrugged his shoulders.“An underwater tunnel!” he exclaimed. “A connection between two seas!Who ever heard of such malarkey!”“Ned my friend,” Conseil replied, “had you ever heard of the Nautilus?No, yet here it is! So don’t shrug your shoulders so blithely, anddon’t discount something with the feeble excuse that you’ve neverheard of it.”“We’ll soon see!” Ned Land shot back, shaking his head. “After all,I’d like nothing better than to believe in your captain’s littlepassageway, and may Heaven grant it really does take us to theMediterranean.”The same evening, at latitude 21 degrees 30’ north, the Nautilus wasafloat on the surface of the sea and drawing nearer to the Arabcoast. I spotted Jidda, an important financial center for Egypt,Syria, Turkey, and the East Indies. I could distinguish withreasonable clarity the overall effect of its buildings, the ships madefast along its wharves, and those bigger vessels whose draft of waterrequired them to drop anchor at the port’s offshore mooring. The sun,fairly low on the horizon, struck full force on the houses in thistown, accenting their whiteness. Outside the city limits, some wood orreed huts indicated the quarter where the bedouins lived.Soon Jidda faded into the shadows of evening, and the Nautilus wentback beneath the mildly phosphorescent waters.The next day, February 10, several ships appeared, running on ouropposite tack. The Nautilus resumed its underwater navigating; but atthe moment of our noon sights, the sea was deserted and the ship roseagain to its waterline.With Ned and Conseil, I went to sit on the platform. The coast to theeast looked like a slightly blurred mass in a damp fog.Leaning against the sides of the skiff, we were chatting of one thingand another, when Ned Land stretched his hand toward a point in thewater, saying to me:“See anything out there, professor?”“No, Ned,” I replied, “but you know I don’t have your eyes.”“Take a good look,” Ned went on. “There, ahead to starboard, almostlevel with the beacon! Don’t you see a mass that seems to be movingaround?”“Right,” I said after observing carefully, “I can make out somethinglike a long, blackish object on the surface of the water.”“A second Nautilus?” Conseil said.“No,” the Canadian replied, “unless I’m badly mistaken, that’s somemarine animal.”“Are there whales in the Red Sea?” Conseil asked.“Yes, my boy,” I replied, “they’re sometimes found here.”“That’s no whale,” continued Ned Land, whose eyes never strayed fromthe object they had sighted. “We’re old chums, whales and I, and Icouldn’t mistake their little ways.”“Let’s wait and see,” Conseil said. “The Nautilus is heading thatdirection, and we’ll soon know what we’re in for.”In fact, that blackish object was soon only a mile away from us. Itlooked like a huge reef stranded in midocean. What was it? I stillcouldn’t make up my mind.“Oh, it’s moving off! It’s diving!” Ned Land exclaimed. “Damnation!What can that animal be? It doesn’t have a forked tail like baleenwhales or sperm whales, and its fins look like sawed-off limbs.”“But in that case—” I put in.“Good lord,” the Canadian went on, “it’s rolled over on its back, andit’s raising its breasts in the air!”“It’s a siren!” Conseil exclaimed. “With all due respect to master,it’s an actual mermaid!”That word “siren” put me back on track, and I realized that the animalbelonged to the order Sirenia: marine creatures that legends haveturned into mermaids, half woman, half fish.“No,” I told Conseil, “that’s no mermaid, it’s an unusual creature ofwhich only a few specimens are left in the Red Sea. That’s a dugong.”“Order Sirenia, group Pisciforma, subclass Monodelphia, classMammalia, branch Vertebrata,” Conseil replied.And when Conseil has spoken, there’s nothing else to be said.Meanwhile Ned Land kept staring. His eyes were gleaming with desire atthe sight of that animal. His hands were ready to hurl a harpoon. Youwould have thought he was waiting for the right moment to jumpoverboard and attack the creature in its own element.“Oh, sir,” he told me in a voice trembling with excitement, “I’venever killed anything like that!”His whole being was concentrated in this last word.Just then Captain Nemo appeared on the platform. He spotted thedugong. He understood the Canadian’s frame of mind and addressed himdirectly:“If you held a harpoon, Mr. Land, wouldn’t your hands be itching toput it to work?”“Positively, sir.”“And just for one day, would it displease you to return to yourfisherman’s trade and add this cetacean to the list of those you’vealready hunted down?”“It wouldn’t displease me one bit.”“All right, you can try your luck!”“Thank you, sir,” Ned Land replied, his eyes ablaze.“Only,” the captain went on, “I urge you to aim carefully at thisanimal, in your own personal interest.”“Is the dugong dangerous to attack?” I asked, despite the Canadian’sshrug of the shoulders.“Yes, sometimes,” the captain replied. “These animals have been knownto turn on their assailants and capsize their longboats. But withMr. Land that danger isn’t to be feared. His eye is sharp, his arm issure. If I recommend that he aim carefully at this dugong, it’sbecause the animal is justly regarded as fine game, and I knowMr. Land doesn’t despise a choice morsel.”“Aha!” the Canadian put in. “This beast offers the added luxury ofbeing good to eat?”“Yes, Mr. Land. Its flesh is actual red meat, highly prized, and setaside throughout Malaysia for the tables of aristocrats. Accordingly,this excellent animal has been hunted so bloodthirstily that, like itsmanatee relatives, it has become more and more scarce.”“In that case, captain,” Conseil said in all seriousness, “on theoffchance that this creature might be the last of its line, wouldn’tit be advisable to spare its life, in the interests of science?”“Maybe,” the Canadian answered, “it would be better to hunt it down,in the interests of mealtime.”“Then proceed, Mr. Land,” Captain Nemo replied.Just then, as mute and emotionless as ever, seven crewmen climbed ontothe platform. One carried a harpoon and line similar to those used inwhale fishing. Its deck paneling opened, the skiff was wrenched fromits socket and launched to sea. Six rowers sat on the thwarts, and thecoxswain took the tiller. Ned, Conseil, and I found seats in thestern.“Aren’t you coming, captain?” I asked.“No, sir, but I wish you happy hunting.”The skiff pulled clear, and carried off by its six oars, it headedswiftly toward the dugong, which by then was floating two miles fromthe Nautilus.Arriving within a few cable lengths of the cetacean, our longboatslowed down, and the sculls dipped noiselessly into the tranquilwaters. Harpoon in hand, Ned Land went to take his stand in theskiff’s bow. Harpoons used for hunting whales are usually attached toa very long rope that pays out quickly when the wounded animal dragsit with him. But this rope measured no more than about ten fathoms,and its end had simply been fastened to a small barrel that, whilefloating, would indicate the dugong’s movements beneath the waters.I stood up and could clearly observe the Canadian’s adversary. Thisdugong—which also boasts the name halicore—closely resembled amanatee. Its oblong body ended in a very long caudal fin and itslateral fins in actual fingers. It differs from the manatee in thatits upper jaw is armed with two long, pointed teeth that formdiverging tusks on either side.This dugong that Ned Land was preparing to attack was of colossaldimensions, easily exceeding seven meters in length. It didn’t stirand seemed to be sleeping on the surface of the waves, a circumstancethat should have made it easier to capture.The skiff approached cautiously to within three fathoms of theanimal. The oars hung suspended above their rowlocks. I wascrouching. His body leaning slightly back, Ned Land brandished hisharpoon with expert hands.Suddenly a hissing sound was audible, and the dugongdisappeared. Although the harpoon had been forcefully hurled, itapparently had hit only water.“Damnation!” exclaimed the furious Canadian. “I missed it!”“No,” I said, “the animal’s wounded, there’s its blood; but yourweapon didn’t stick in its body.”“My harpoon! Get my harpoon!” Ned Land exclaimed.The sailors went back to their sculling, and the coxswain steered thelongboat toward the floating barrel. We fished up the harpoon, and theskiff started off in pursuit of the animal.The latter returned from time to time to breathe at the surface of thesea. Its wound hadn’t weakened it because it went with tremendousspeed. Driven by energetic arms, the longboat flew on itstrail. Several times we got within a few fathoms of it, and theCanadian hovered in readiness to strike; but then the dugong wouldsteal away with a sudden dive, and it proved impossible to overtakethe beast.I’ll let you assess the degree of anger consuming our impatient NedLand. He hurled at the hapless animal the most potent swearwords inthe English language. For my part, I was simply distressed to see thisdugong outwit our every scheme.We chased it unflaggingly for a full hour, and I’d begun to think itwould prove too difficult to capture, when the animal got the untimelyidea of taking revenge on us, a notion it would soon have cause toregret. It wheeled on the skiff, to assault us in its turn.This maneuver did not escape the Canadian.“Watch out!” he said.The coxswain pronounced a few words in his bizarre language, and nodoubt he alerted his men to keep on their guard.Arriving within twenty feet of the skiff, the dugong stopped, sharplysniffing the air with its huge nostrils, pierced not at the tip of itsmuzzle but on its topside. Then it gathered itself and sprang at us.The skiff couldn’t avoid the collision. Half overturned, it shipped aton or two of water that we had to bail out. But thanks to ourskillful coxswain, we were fouled on the bias rather than broadside,so we didn’t capsize. Clinging to the stempost, Ned Land thrust hisharpoon again and again into the gigantic animal, which imbedded itsteeth in our gunwale and lifted the longboat out of the water as alion would lift a deer. We were thrown on top of each other, and Ihave no idea how the venture would have ended had not the Canadian,still thirsting for the beast’s blood, finally pierced it to theheart.I heard its teeth grind on sheet iron, and the dugong disappeared,taking our harpoon along with it. But the barrel soon popped up on thesurface, and a few moments later the animal’s body appeared and rolledover on its back. Our skiff rejoined it, took it in tow, and headed tothe Nautilus.It took pulleys of great strength to hoist this dugong onto theplatform. The beast weighed 5,000 kilograms. It was carved up in sightof the Canadian, who remained to watch every detail of theoperation. At dinner the same day, my steward served me some slices ofthis flesh, skillfully dressed by the ship’s cook. I found itexcellent, even better than veal if not beef.The next morning, February 11, the Nautilus’s pantry was enriched bymore dainty game. A covey of terns alighted on the Nautilus. They werea species of Sterna nilotica unique to Egypt: beak black, head grayand stippled, eyes surrounded by white dots, back, wings, and tailgrayish, belly and throat white, feet red. Also caught were a coupledozen Nile duck, superior-tasting wildfowl whose neck and crown of thehead are white speckled with black.By then the Nautilus had reduced speed. It moved ahead at a saunter,so to speak. I observed that the Red Sea’s water was becoming lesssalty the closer we got to Suez.Near five o’clock in the afternoon, we sighted Cape Ras Mohammed tothe north. This cape forms the tip of Arabia Petraea, which liesbetween the Gulf of Suez and the Gulf of Aqaba.The Nautilus entered the Strait of Jubal, which leads to the Gulf ofSuez. I could clearly make out a high mountain crowning Ras Mohammedbetween the two gulfs. It was Mt. Horeb, that biblical Mt. Sinai onwhose summit Moses met God face to face, that summit the mind’s eyealways pictures as wreathed in lightning.At six o’clock, sometimes afloat and sometimes submerged, the Nautiluspassed well out from El Tur, which sat at the far end of a bay whosewaters seemed to be dyed red, as Captain Nemo had alreadymentioned. Then night fell in the midst of a heavy silenceoccasionally broken by the calls of pelicans and nocturnal birds, bythe sound of surf chafing against rocks, or by the distant moan of asteamer churning the waves of the gulf with noisy blades.From eight to nine o’clock, the Nautilus stayed a few meters beneaththe waters. According to my calculations, we had to be quite close toSuez. Through the panels in the lounge, I spotted rocky bottomsbrightly lit by our electric rays. It seemed to me that the strait wasgetting narrower and narrower.At 9:15 when our boat returned to the surface, I climbed onto theplatform. I was quite impatient to clear Captain Nemo’s tunnel,couldn’t sit still, and wanted to breathe the fresh night air.Soon, in the shadows, I spotted a pale signal light glimmering a mileaway, half discolored by mist.“A floating lighthouse,” said someone next to me.I turned and discovered the captain.“That’s the floating signal light of Suez,” he went on. “It won’t belong before we reach the entrance to the tunnel.”“It can’t be very easy to enter it.”“No, sir. Accordingly, I’m in the habit of staying in the pilothouseand directing maneuvers myself. And now if you’ll kindly go below,Professor Aronnax, the Nautilus is about to sink beneath the waves,and it will only return to the surface after we’ve cleared the ArabianTunnel.”I followed Captain Nemo. The hatch closed, the ballast tanks filledwith water, and the submersible sank some ten meters down.Just as I was about to repair to my stateroom, the captain stopped me.“Professor,” he said to me, “would you like to go with me to thewheelhouse?”“I was afraid to ask,” I replied.“Come along, then. This way, you’ll learn the full story about thiscombination underwater and underground navigating.”Captain Nemo led me to the central companionway. In midstair he openeda door, went along the upper gangways, and arrived at the wheelhouse,which, as you know, stands at one end of the platform.It was a cabin measuring six feet square and closely resembling thoseoccupied by the helmsmen of steamboats on the Mississippi or Hudsonrivers. In the center stood an upright wheel geared to rudder cablesrunning to the Nautilus’s stern. Set in the cabin’s walls were fourdeadlights, windows of biconvex glass that enabled the man at the helmto see in every direction.The cabin was dark; but my eyes soon grew accustomed to its darknessand I saw the pilot, a muscular man whose hands rested on the pegs ofthe wheel. Outside, the sea was brightly lit by the beacon shiningbehind the cabin at the other end of the platform.“Now,” Captain Nemo said, “let’s look for our passageway.”Electric wires linked the pilothouse with the engine room, and fromthis cabin the captain could simultaneously signal heading and speedto his Nautilus. He pressed a metal button and at once the propellerslowed down significantly.I stared in silence at the high, sheer wall we were skirting justthen, the firm base of the sandy mountains on the coast. For an hourwe went along it in this fashion, staying only a few metersaway. Captain Nemo never took his eyes off the two concentric circlesof the compass hanging in the cabin. At a mere gesture from him, thehelmsman would instantly change the Nautilus’s heading.Standing by the port deadlight, I spotted magnificent coralsubstructures, zoophytes, algae, and crustaceans with enormousquivering claws that stretched forth from crevices in the rock.At 10:15 Captain Nemo himself took the helm. Dark and deep, a widegallery opened ahead of us. The Nautilus was brazenly swallowedup. Strange rumblings were audible along our sides. It was the waterof the Red Sea, hurled toward the Mediterranean by the tunnel’sslope. Our engines tried to offer resistance by churning the waveswith propeller in reverse, but the Nautilus went with the torrent, asswift as an arrow.Along the narrow walls of this passageway, I saw only brilliantstreaks, hard lines, fiery furrows, all scrawled by our speedingelectric light. With my hand I tried to curb the pounding of my heart.At 10:35 Captain Nemo left the steering wheel and turned to me:“The Mediterranean,” he told me.In less than twenty minutes, swept along by the torrent, the Nautilushad just cleared the Isthmus of Suez.CHAPTER 6The Greek IslandsAT SUNRISE the next morning, February 12, the Nautilus rose to thesurface of the waves.I rushed onto the platform. The hazy silhouette of Pelusium wasoutlined three miles to the south. A torrent had carried us from onesea to the other. But although that tunnel was easy to descend, goingback up must have been impossible.Near seven o’clock Ned and Conseil joined me. Those two inseparablecompanions had slept serenely, utterly unaware of the Nautilus’s feat.“Well, Mr. Naturalist,” the Canadian asked in a gently mocking tone,“and how about that Mediterranean?”“We’re floating on its surface, Ned my friend.”“What!” Conseil put in. “Last night . . . ?”“Yes, last night, in a matter of minutes, we cleared that insuperableisthmus.”“I don’t believe a word of it,” the Canadian replied.“And you’re in the wrong, Mr. Land,” I went on. “That flat coastlinecurving southward is the coast of Egypt.”“Tell it to the marines, sir,” answered the stubborn Canadian.“But if master says so,” Conseil told him, “then so be it.”“What’s more, Ned,” I said, “Captain Nemo himself did the honors inhis tunnel, and I stood beside him in the pilothouse while he steeredthe Nautilus through that narrow passageway.”“You hear, Ned?” Conseil said.“And you, Ned, who have such good eyes,” I added, “you can spot thejetties of Port Said stretching out to sea.”The Canadian looked carefully.“Correct,” he said. “You’re right, professor, and your captain’s asuperman. We’re in the Mediterranean. Fine. So now let’s have a chatabout our little doings, if you please, but in such a way that nobodyoverhears.”I could easily see what the Canadian was driving at. In any event, Ithought it best to let him have his chat, and we all three went to sitnext to the beacon, where we were less exposed to the damp spray fromthe billows.“Now, Ned, we’re all ears,” I said. “What have you to tell us?”“What I’ve got to tell you is very simple,” the Canadianreplied. “We’re in Europe, and before Captain Nemo’s whims take usdeep into the polar seas or back to Oceania, I say we should leavethis Nautilus.”I confess that such discussions with the Canadian always baffled me. Ididn’t want to restrict my companions’ freedom in any way, and yet Ihad no desire to leave Captain Nemo. Thanks to him and hissubmersible, I was finishing my undersea research by the day, and Iwas rewriting my book on the great ocean depths in the midst of itsvery element. Would I ever again have such an opportunity to observethe ocean’s wonders? Absolutely not! So I couldn’t entertain this ideaof leaving the Nautilus before completing our course of inquiry.“Ned my friend,” I said, “answer me honestly. Are you bored with thisship? Are you sorry that fate has cast you into Captain Nemo’s hands?”The Canadian paused for a short while before replying. Then, crossinghis arms:“Honestly,” he said, “I’m not sorry about this voyage under theseas. I’ll be glad to have done it, but in order to have done it, ithas to finish. That’s my feeling.”“It will finish, Ned.”“Where and when?”“Where? I don’t know. When? I can’t say. Or, rather, I suppose it willbe over when these seas have nothing more to teach us. Everything thatbegins in this world must inevitably come to an end.”“I think as master does,” Conseil replied, “and it’s extremelypossible that after crossing every sea on the globe, Captain Nemo willbid the three of us a fond farewell.”“Bid us a fond farewell?” the Canadian exclaimed. “You mean beat us toa fare-thee-well!”“Let’s not exaggerate, Mr. Land,” I went on. “We have nothing to fearfrom the captain, but neither do I share Conseil’s views. We’re privyto the Nautilus’s secrets, and I don’t expect that its commander, justto set us free, will meekly stand by while we spread those secrets allover the world.”“But in that case what do you expect?” the Canadian asked.“That we’ll encounter advantageous conditions for escaping just asreadily in six months as now.”“Great Scott!” Ned Land put in. “And where, if you please, will we bein six months, Mr. Naturalist?”“Perhaps here, perhaps in China. You know how quickly the Nautilusmoves. It crosses oceans like swallows cross the air or express trainscontinents. It doesn’t fear heavily traveled seas. Who can say itwon’t hug the coasts of France, England, or America, where an escapeattempt could be carried out just as effectively as here.”“Professor Aronnax,” the Canadian replied, “your arguments are rottento the core. You talk way off in the future: ‘We’ll be here, we’ll bethere!’ Me, I’m talking about right now: we are here, and we must takeadvantage of it!”I was hard pressed by Ned Land’s common sense, and I felt myselflosing ground. I no longer knew what arguments to put forward on mybehalf.“Sir,” Ned went on, “let’s suppose that by some impossibility, CaptainNemo offered your freedom to you this very day. Would you accept?”“I don’t know,” I replied.“And suppose he adds that this offer he’s making you today won’t everbe repeated, then would you accept?”I did not reply.“And what thinks our friend Conseil?” Ned Land asked.“Your friend Conseil,” the fine lad replied serenely, “has nothing tosay for himself. He’s a completely disinterested party on thisquestion. Like his master, like his comrade Ned, he’s abachelor. Neither wife, parents, nor children are waiting for him backhome. He’s in master’s employ, he thinks like master, he speaks likemaster, and much to his regret, he can’t be counted on to form amajority. Only two persons face each other here: master on one side,Ned Land on the other. That said, your friend Conseil is listening,and he’s ready to keep score.”I couldn’t help smiling as Conseil wiped himself out ofexistence. Deep down, the Canadian must have been overjoyed at nothaving to contend with him.“Then, sir,” Ned Land said, “since Conseil is no more, we’ll have thisdiscussion between just the two of us. I’ve talked, you’velistened. What’s your reply?”It was obvious that the matter had to be settled, and evasions weredistasteful to me.“Ned my friend,” I said, “here’s my reply. You have right on your sideand my arguments can’t stand up to yours. It will never do to count onCaptain Nemo’s benevolence. The most ordinary good sense would forbidhim to set us free. On the other hand, good sense decrees that we takeadvantage of our first opportunity to leave the Nautilus.”“Fine, Professor Aronnax, that’s wisely said.”“But one proviso,” I said, “just one. The opportunity must be the realthing. Our first attempt to escape must succeed, because if itmisfires, we won’t get a second chance, and Captain Nemo will neverforgive us.”“That’s also well put,” the Canadian replied. “But your provisoapplies to any escape attempt, whether it happens in two years or twodays. So this is still the question: if a promising opportunity comesup, we have to grab it.”“Agreed. And now, Ned, will you tell me what you mean by a promisingopportunity?”“One that leads the Nautilus on a cloudy night within a short distanceof some European coast.”“And you’ll try to get away by swimming?”“Yes, if we’re close enough to shore and the ship’s afloat on thesurface. No, if we’re well out and the ship’s navigating under thewaters.”“And in that event?”“In that event I’ll try to get hold of the skiff. I know how to handleit. We’ll stick ourselves inside, undo the bolts, and rise to thesurface, without the helmsman in the bow seeing a thing.”“Fine, Ned. Stay on the lookout for such an opportunity, but don’tforget, one slipup will finish us.”“I won’t forget, sir.”“And now, Ned, would you like to know my overall thinking on yourplan?”“Gladly, Professor Aronnax.”“Well then, I think—and I don’t mean ‘I hope’—that your promisingopportunity won’t ever arise.”“Why not?”“Because Captain Nemo recognizes that we haven’t given up all hope ofrecovering our freedom, and he’ll keep on his guard, above all in seaswithin sight of the coasts of Europe.”“I’m of master’s opinion,” Conseil said.“We’ll soon see,” Ned Land replied, shaking his head with a determinedexpression.“And now, Ned Land,” I added, “let’s leave it at that. Not anotherword on any of this. The day you’re ready, alert us and we’re withyou. I turn it all over to you.”That’s how we ended this conversation, which later was to have suchserious consequences. At first, I must say, events seemed to confirmmy forecasts, much to the Canadian’s despair. Did Captain Nemo view uswith distrust in these heavily traveled seas, or did he simply want tohide from the sight of those ships of every nation that plowed theMediterranean? I have no idea, but usually he stayed in midwater andwell out from any coast. Either the Nautilus surfaced only enough tolet its pilothouse emerge, or it slipped away to the lower depths,although, between the Greek Islands and Asia Minor, we didn’t findbottom even at 2,000 meters down.Accordingly, I became aware of the isle of Karpathos, one of theSporades Islands, only when Captain Nemo placed his finger over a spoton the world map and quoted me this verse from Virgil:Est in Carpathio Neptuni gurgite vatesCaeruleus Proteus . . .**Latin: “There in King Neptune’s domain by Karpathos, his spokesman /is azure-hued Proteus . . . ” Ed.It was indeed that bygone abode of Proteus, the old shepherd of KingNeptune’s flocks: an island located between Rhodes and Crete, whichGreeks now call Karpathos, Italians Scarpanto. Through the loungewindow I could see only its granite bedrock.The next day, February 14, I decided to spend a few hours studying thefish of this island group; but for whatever reason, the panelsremained hermetically sealed. After determining the Nautilus’sheading, I noted that it was proceeding toward the ancient island ofCrete, also called Candia. At the time I had shipped aboard theAbraham Lincoln, this whole island was in rebellion against itstyrannical rulers, the Ottoman Empire of Turkey. But since then I hadabsolutely no idea what happened to this revolution, and Captain Nemo,deprived of all contact with the shore, was hardly the man to keep meinformed.So I didn’t allude to this event when, that evening, I chanced to bealone with the captain in the lounge. Besides, he seemed silent andpreoccupied. Then, contrary to custom, he ordered that both panels inthe lounge be opened, and going from the one to the other, hecarefully observed the watery mass. For what purpose? I hadn’t aguess, and for my part, I spent my time studying the fish that passedbefore my eyes.Among others I noted that sand goby mentioned by Aristotle andcommonly known by the name sea loach, which is encountered exclusivelyin the salty waters next to the Nile Delta. Near them somesemiphosphorescent red porgy rolled by, a variety of gilthead that theEgyptians ranked among their sacred animals, lauding them in religiousceremonies when their arrival in the river’s waters announced thefertile flood season. I also noticed some wrasse known as the tapiro,three decimeters long, bony fish with transparent scales whose bluishgray color is mixed with red spots; they’re enthusiastic eaters ofmarine vegetables, which gives them an exquisite flavor; hence thesetapiro were much in demand by the epicures of ancient Rome, and theirentrails were dressed with brains of peacock, tongue of flamingo, andtestes of moray to make that divine platter that so enraptured theRoman emperor Vitellius.Another resident of these seas caught my attention and revived all mymemories of antiquity. This was the remora, which travels attached tothe bellies of sharks; as the ancients tell it, when these little fishcling to the undersides of a ship, they can bring it to a halt, and byso impedingMark Antony’s vessel during the Battle of Actium, one of themfacilitated the victory of Augustus Caesar. From such slender threadshang the destinies of nations! I also observed some wonderful snappersbelonging to the order Lutianida, sacred fish for the Greeks, whoclaimed they could drive off sea monsters from the waters theyfrequent; their Greek name anthias means “flower,” and they live up toit in the play of their colors and in those fleeting reflections thatturn their dorsal fins into watered silk; their hues are confined to agamut of reds, from the pallor of pink to the glow of ruby. I couldn’ttake my eyes off these marine wonders, when I was suddenly jolted byan unexpected apparition.In the midst of the waters, a man appeared, a diver carrying a littleleather bag at his belt. It was no corpse lost in the waves. It was aliving man, swimming vigorously, sometimes disappearing to breathe atthe surface, then instantly diving again.I turned to Captain Nemo, and in an agitated voice:“A man! A castaway!” I exclaimed. “We must rescue him at all cost!”The captain didn’t reply but went to lean against the window.The man drew near, and gluing his face to the panel, he stared at us.To my deep astonishment, Captain Nemo gave him a signal. The diveranswered with his hand, immediately swam up to the surface of the sea,and didn’t reappear.“Don’t be alarmed,” the captain told me. “That’s Nicolas from CapeMatapan, nicknamed ‘Il Pesce.’* He’s well known throughout theCyclades Islands. A bold diver! Water is his true element, and helives in the sea more than on shore, going constantly from one islandto another, even to Crete.”*Italian: “The Fish.” Ed.“You know him, captain?”“Why not, Professor Aronnax?”This said, Captain Nemo went to a cabinet standing near the lounge’sleft panel. Next to this cabinet I saw a chest bound with hoops ofiron, its lid bearing a copper plaque that displayed the Nautilus’smonogram with its motto Mobilis in Mobili.Just then, ignoring my presence, the captain opened this cabinet, asort of safe that contained a large number of ingots.They were gold ingots. And they represented an enormous sum ofmoney. Where had this precious metal come from? How had the captainamassed this gold, and what was he about to do with it?I didn’t pronounce a word. I gaped. Captain Nemo took out the ingotsone by one and arranged them methodically inside the chest, filling itto the top. At which point I estimate that it held more than 1,000kilograms of gold, in other words, close to 5,000,000 francs.After securely fastening the chest, Captain Nemo wrote an address onits lid in characters that must have been modern Greek.This done, the captain pressed a button whose wiring was incommunication with the crew’s quarters. Four men appeared and, notwithout difficulty, pushed the chest out of the lounge. Then I heardthem hoist it up the iron companionway by means of pulleys.Just then Captain Nemo turned to me:“You were saying, professor?” he asked me.“I wasn’t saying a thing, captain.”“Then, sir, with your permission, I’ll bid you good evening.”And with that, Captain Nemo left the lounge.I reentered my stateroom, very puzzled, as you can imagine. I tried invain to fall asleep. I kept searching for a relationship between theappearance of the diver and that chest filled with gold. Soon, fromcertain rolling and pitching movements, I sensed that the Nautilus hadleft the lower strata and was back on the surface of the water.Then I heard the sound of footsteps on the platform. I realized thatthe skiff was being detached and launched to sea. For an instant itbumped the Nautilus’s side, then all sounds ceased.Two hours later, the same noises, the same comings and goings, wererepeated. Hoisted on board, the longboat was readjusted into itssocket, and the Nautilus plunged back beneath the waves.So those millions had been delivered to their address. At what spot onthe continent? Who was the recipient of Captain Nemo’s gold?The next day I related the night’s events to Conseil and the Canadian,events that had aroused my curiosity to a fever pitch. My companionswere as startled as I was.“But where does he get those millions?” Ned Land asked.To this no reply was possible. After breakfast I made my way to thelounge and went about my work. I wrote up my notes until five o’clockin the afternoon. Just then—was it due to some personalindisposition?—I felt extremely hot and had to take off my jacket madeof fan mussel fabric. A perplexing circumstance because we weren’t inthe low latitudes, and besides, once the Nautilus was submerged, itshouldn’t be subject to any rise in temperature. I looked at thepressure gauge. It marked a depth of sixty feet, a depth beyond thereach of atmospheric heat.I kept on working, but the temperature rose to the point of becomingunbearable.“Could there be a fire on board?” I wondered.I was about to leave the lounge when Captain Nemo entered. Heapproached the thermometer, consulted it, and turned to me:“42 degrees centigrade,” he said.“I’ve detected as much, captain,” I replied, “and if it gets evenslightly hotter, we won’t be able to stand it.”“Oh, professor, it won’t get any hotter unless we want it to!”“You mean you can control this heat?”“No, but I can back away from the fireplace producing it.”“So it’s outside?”“Surely. We’re cruising in a current of boiling water.”“It can’t be!” I exclaimed.“Look.”The panels had opened, and I could see a completely white sea aroundthe Nautilus. Steaming sulfurous fumes uncoiled in the midst of wavesbubbling like water in a boiler. I leaned my hand against one of thewindows, but the heat was so great, I had to snatch it back.“Where are we?” I asked.“Near the island of Santorini, professor,” the captain answered me,“and right in the channel that separates the volcanic islets of NeaKameni and Palea Kameni. I wanted to offer you the unusual sight of anunderwater eruption.”“I thought,” I said, “that the formation of such new islands had cometo an end.”“Nothing ever comes to an end in these volcanic waterways,” CaptainNemo replied, “and thanks to its underground fires, our globe iscontinuously under construction in these regions. According to theLatin historians Cassiodorus and Pliny, by the year 19 of theChristian era, a new island, the divine Thera, had already appeared inthe very place these islets have more recently formed. Then Thera sankunder the waves, only to rise and sink once more in the year 69A.D. From that day to this, such plutonic construction work has beenin abeyance. But on February 3, 1866, a new islet named George Islandemerged in the midst of sulfurous steam near Nea Kameni and was fusedto it on the 6th of the same month. Seven days later, on February 13,the islet of Aphroessa appeared, leaving a ten-meter channel betweenitself and Nea Kameni. I was in these seas when that phenomenonoccurred and I was able to observe its every phase. The islet ofAphroessa was circular in shape, measuring 300 feet in diameter andthirty feet in height. It was made of black, glassy lava mixed withbits of feldspar. Finally, on March 10, a smaller islet called Rekaappeared next to Nea Kameni, and since then, these three islets havefused to form one single, selfsame island.”“What about this channel we’re in right now?” I asked.“Here it is,” Captain Nemo replied, showing me a chart of the GreekIslands. “You observe that I’ve entered the new islets in theirplace.”“But will this channel fill up one day?”“Very likely, Professor Aronnax, because since 1866 eight little lavaislets have surged up in front of the port of St. Nicolas on PaleaKameni. So it’s obvious that Nea and Palea will join in days tocome. In the middle of the Pacific, tiny infusoria build continents,but here they’re built by volcanic phenomena. Look, sir! Look at theconstruction work going on under these waves.”I returned to the window. The Nautilus was no longer moving. The heathad become unbearable. From the white it had recently been, the seawas turning red, a coloration caused by the presence of ironsalts. Although the lounge was hermetically sealed, it was fillingwith an intolerable stink of sulfur, and I could see scarlet flames ofsuch brightness, they overpowered our electric light.I was swimming in perspiration, I was stifling, I was about to becooked. Yes, I felt myself cooking in actual fact!“We can’t stay any longer in this boiling water,” I told the captain.“No, it wouldn’t be advisable,” replied Nemo the Emotionless.He gave an order. The Nautilus tacked about and retreated from thisfurnace it couldn’t brave with impunity. A quarter of an hour later,we were breathing fresh air on the surface of the waves.It then occurred to me that if Ned had chosen these waterways for ourescape attempt, we wouldn’t have come out alive from this sea of fire.The next day, February 16, we left this basin, which tallies depths of3,000 meters between Rhodes and Alexandria, and passing well out fromCerigo Island after doubling Cape Matapan, the Nautilus left the GreekIslands behind.CHAPTER 7The Mediterranean in Forty-Eight HoursTHE MEDITERRANEAN, your ideal blue sea: to Greeks simply “the sea,” toHebrews “the great sea,” to Romans mare nostrum.* Bordered by orangetrees, aloes, cactus, and maritime pine trees, perfumed with the scentof myrtle, framed by rugged mountains, saturated with clean,transparent air but continuously under construction by fires in theearth, this sea is a genuine battlefield where Neptune and Pluto stillstruggle for world domination. Here on these beaches and waters, saysthe French historian Michelet, a man is revived by one of the mostinvigorating climates in the world.*Latin: “our sea.” Ed.But as beautiful as it was, I could get only a quick look at thisbasin whose surface area comprises 2,000,000 square kilometers. EvenCaptain Nemo’s personal insights were denied me, because thatmystifying individual didn’t appear one single time during ourhigh-speed crossing. I estimate that the Nautilus covered a track ofsome 600 leagues under the waves of this sea, and this voyage wasaccomplished in just twenty-four hours times two. Departing from thewaterways of Greece on the morning of February 16, we cleared theStrait of Gibraltar by sunrise on the 18th.It was obvious to me that this Mediterranean, pinned in the middle ofthose shores he wanted to avoid, gave Captain Nemo no pleasure. Itswaves and breezes brought back too many memories, if not too manyregrets. Here he no longer had the ease of movement and freedom ofmaneuver that the oceans allowed him, and his Nautilus felt cramped soclose to the coasts of both Africa and Europe.Accordingly, our speed was twenty-five miles (that is, twelvefour-kilometer leagues) per hour. Needless to say, Ned Land had togive up his escape plans, much to his distress. Swept along at therate of twelve to thirteen meters per second, he could hardly make useof the skiff. Leaving the Nautilus under these conditions would havebeen like jumping off a train racing at this speed, a rash move ifthere ever was one. Moreover, to renew our air supply, the submersiblerose to the surface of the waves only at night, and relying solely oncompass and log, it steered by dead reckoning.Inside the Mediterranean, then, I could catch no more of itsfast-passing scenery than a traveler might see from an express train;in other words, I could view only the distant horizons because theforegrounds flashed by like lightning. But Conseil and I were able toobserve those Mediterranean fish whose powerful fins kept pace for awhile in the Nautilus’s waters. We stayed on watch before the loungewindows, and our notes enable me to reconstruct, in a few words, theichthyology of this sea.Among the various fish inhabiting it, some I viewed, others Iglimpsed, and the rest I missed completely because of the Nautilus’sspeed. Kindly allow me to sort them out using this whimsical system ofclassification. It will at least convey the quickness of myobservations.In the midst of the watery mass, brightly lit by our electric beams,there snaked past those one-meter lampreys that are common to nearlyevery clime. A type of ray from the genus Oxyrhynchus, five feet wide,had a white belly with a spotted, ash-gray back and was carried alongby the currents like a huge, wide-open shawl. Other rays passed by soquickly I couldn’t tell if they deserved that name “eagle ray” coinedby the ancient Greeks, or those designations of “rat ray,” “bat ray,”and “toad ray” that modern fishermen have inflicted on them. Dogfishknown as topes, twelve feet long and especially feared by divers, wereracing with each other. Looking like big bluish shadows, threshersharks went by, eight feet long and gifted with an extremely acutesense of smell. Dorados from the genus Sparus, some measuring up tothirteen decimeters, appeared in silver and azure costumes encircledwith ribbons, which contrasted with the dark color of their fins; fishsacred to the goddess Venus, their eyes set in brows of gold; avaluable species that patronizes all waters fresh or salt, equally athome in rivers, lakes, and oceans, living in every clime, toleratingany temperature, their line dating back to prehistoric times on thisearth yet preserving all its beauty from those far-offdays. Magnificent sturgeons, nine to ten meters long and extremelyfast, banged their powerful tails against the glass of our panels,showing bluish backs with small brown spots; they resemble sharks,without equaling their strength, and are encountered in every sea; inthe spring they delight in swimming up the great rivers, fighting thecurrents of the Volga, Danube, Po, Rhine, Loire, and Oder, whilefeeding on herring, mackerel, salmon, and codfish; although theybelong to the class of cartilaginous fish, they rate as a delicacy;they’re eaten fresh, dried, marinated, or salt-preserved, and in oldentimes they were borne in triumph to the table of the Roman epicureLucullus.But whenever the Nautilus drew near the surface, those denizens of theMediterranean I could observe most productively belonged to thesixty-third genus of bony fish. These were tuna from the genusScomber, blue-black on top, silver on the belly armor, their dorsalstripes giving off a golden gleam. They are said to follow ships insearch of refreshing shade from the hot tropical sun, and they didjust that with the Nautilus, as they had once done with the vessels ofthe Count de La Pérouse. For long hours they competed in speed withour submersible. I couldn’t stop marveling at these animals soperfectly cut out for racing, their heads small, their bodies sleek,spindle-shaped, and in some cases over three meters long, theirpectoral fins gifted with remarkable strength, their caudal finsforked. Like certain flocks of birds, whose speed they equal, thesetuna swim in triangle formation, which prompted the ancients to saythey’d boned up on geometry and military strategy. And yet they can’tescape the Provençal fishermen, who prize them as highly as did theancient inhabitants of Turkey and Italy; and these valuable animals,as oblivious as if they were deaf and blind, leap right into theMarseilles tuna nets and perish by the thousands.Just for the record, I’ll mention those Mediterranean fish thatConseil and I barely glimpsed. There were whitish eels of the speciesGymnotus fasciatus that passed like elusive wisps of steam, congereels three to four meters long that were tricked out in green, blue,and yellow, three-foot hake with a liver that makes a dainty morsel,wormfish drifting like thin seaweed, sea robins that poets calllyrefish and seamen pipers and whose snouts have two jagged triangularplates shaped like old Homer’s lyre, swallowfish swimming as fast asthe bird they’re named after, redheaded groupers whose dorsal fins aretrimmed with filaments, some shad (spotted with black, gray, brown,blue, yellow, and green) that actually respond to tinkling handbells,splendid diamond-shaped turbot that were like aquatic pheasants withyellowish fins stippled in brown and the left topside mostly marbledin brown and yellow, finally schools of wonderful red mullet, realoceanic birds of paradise that ancient Romans bought for as much as10,000 sesterces apiece, and which they killed at the table, so theycould heartlessly watch it change color from cinnabar red when aliveto pallid white when dead.And as for other fish common to the Atlantic and Mediterranean, I wasunable to observe miralets, triggerfish, puffers, seahorses,jewelfish, trumpetfish, blennies, gray mullet, wrasse, smelt, flyingfish, anchovies, sea bream, porgies, garfish, or any of the chiefrepresentatives of the order Pleuronecta, such as sole, flounder,plaice, dab, and brill, simply because of the dizzying speed withwhich the Nautilus hustled through these opulent waters.As for marine mammals, on passing by the mouth of the Adriatic Sea, Ithought I recognized two or three sperm whales equipped with thesingle dorsal fin denoting the genus Physeter, some pilot whales fromthe genus Globicephalus exclusive to the Mediterranean, the forepartof the head striped with small distinct lines, and also a dozen sealswith white bellies and black coats, known by the name monk seals andjust as solemn as if they were three-meter Dominicans.For his part, Conseil thought he spotted a turtle six feet wide andadorned with three protruding ridges that ran lengthwise. I was sorryto miss this reptile, because from Conseil’s description, I believe Irecognized the leatherback turtle, a pretty rare species. For my part,I noted only some loggerhead turtles with long carapaces.As for zoophytes, for a few moments I was able to marvel at awonderful, orange-hued hydra from the genus Galeolaria that clung tothe glass of our port panel; it consisted of a long, lean filamentthat spread out into countless branches and ended in the most delicatelace ever spun by the followers of Arachne. Unfortunately I couldn’tfish up this wonderful specimen, and surely no other Mediterraneanzoophytes would have been offered to my gaze, if, on the evening ofthe 16th, the Nautilus hadn’t slowed down in an odd fashion. This wasthe situation.By then we were passing between Sicily and the coast of Tunisia. Inthe cramped space between Cape Bon and the Strait of Messina, the seabottom rises almost all at once. It forms an actual ridge with onlyseventeen meters of water remaining above it, while the depth oneither side is 170 meters. Consequently, the Nautilus had to maneuverwith caution so as not to bump into this underwater barrier.I showed Conseil the position of this long reef on our chart of theMediterranean.“But with all due respect to master,” Conseil ventured to observe,“it’s like an actual isthmus connecting Europe to Africa.”“Yes, my boy,” I replied, “it cuts across the whole Strait of Sicily,and Smith’s soundings prove that in the past, these two continentswere genuinely connected between Cape Boeo and Cape Farina.”“I can easily believe it,” Conseil said.“I might add,” I went on, “that there’s a similar barrier betweenGibraltar and Ceuta, and in prehistoric times it closed off theMediterranean completely.”“Gracious!” Conseil put in. “Suppose one day some volcanic upheavalraises these two barriers back above the waves!”“That’s most unlikely, Conseil.”“If master will allow me to finish, I mean that if this phenomenonoccurs, it might prove distressing to Mr. de Lesseps, who has gone tosuch pains to cut through his isthmus!”“Agreed, but I repeat, Conseil: such a phenomenon won’t occur. Theintensity of these underground forces continues to diminish. Volcanoeswere quite numerous in the world’s early days, but they’re goingextinct one by one; the heat inside the earth is growing weaker, thetemperature in the globe’s lower strata is cooling appreciably everycentury, and to our globe’s detriment, because its heat is its life.”“But the sun—”“The sun isn’t enough, Conseil. Can it restore heat to a corpse?”“Not that I’ve heard.”“Well, my friend, someday the earth will be just such a coldcorpse. Like the moon, which long ago lost its vital heat, our globewill become lifeless and unlivable.”“In how many centuries?” Conseil asked.“In hundreds of thousands of years, my boy.”“Then we have ample time to finish our voyage,” Conseil replied, “ifNed Land doesn’t mess things up!”Thus reassured, Conseil went back to studying the shallows that theNautilus was skimming at moderate speed.On the rocky, volcanic seafloor, there bloomed quite a collection ofmoving flora: sponges, sea cucumbers, jellyfish called seagooseberries that were adorned with reddish tendrils and gave off asubtle phosphorescence, members of the genus Beroe that are commonlyknown by the name melon jellyfish and are bathed in the shimmer of thewhole solar spectrum, free-swimming crinoids one meter wide thatreddened the waters with their crimson hue, treelike basket stars ofthe greatest beauty, sea fans from the genus Pavonacea with longstems, numerous edible sea urchins of various species, plus green seaanemones with a grayish trunk and a brown disk lost beneath theolive-colored tresses of their tentacles.Conseil kept especially busy observing mollusks and articulates, andalthough his catalog is a little dry, I wouldn’t want to wrong thegallant lad by leaving out his personal observations.From the branch Mollusca, he mentions numerous comb-shaped scallops,hooflike spiny oysters piled on top of each other, triangular coquina,three-pronged glass snails with yellow fins and transparent shells,orange snails from the genus Pleurobranchus that looked like eggsspotted or speckled with greenish dots, members of the genus Aplysiaalso known by the name sea hares, other sea hares from the genusDolabella, plump paper-bubble shells, umbrella shells exclusive to theMediterranean, abalone whose shell produces a mother-of-pearl much indemand, pilgrim scallops, saddle shells that diners in the Frenchprovince of Languedoc are said to like better than oysters, some ofthose cockleshells so dear to the citizens of Marseilles, fat whitevenus shells that are among the clams so abundant off the coasts ofNorth America and eaten in such quantities by New Yorkers, variouslycolored comb shells with gill covers, burrowing date mussels with apeppery flavor I relish, furrowed heart cockles whose shells haveriblike ridges on their arching summits, triton shells pocked withscarlet bumps, carniaira snails with backward-curving tips that makethem resemble flimsy gondolas, crowned ferola snails, atlanta snailswith spiral shells, gray nudibranchs from the genus Tethys that werespotted with white and covered by fringed mantles, nudibranchs fromthe suborder Eolidea that looked like small slugs, sea butterfliescrawling on their backs, seashells from the genus Auricula includingthe oval-shaped Auricula myosotis, tan wentletrap snails, commonperiwinkles, violet snails, cineraira snails, rock borers, ear shells,cabochon snails, pandora shells, etc.As for the articulates, in his notes Conseil has very appropriatelydivided them into six classes, three of which belong to the marineworld. These classes are the Crustacea, Cirripedia, and Annelida.Crustaceans are subdivided into nine orders, and the first of theseconsists of the decapods, in other words, animals whose head andthorax are usually fused, whose cheek-and-mouth mechanism is made upof several pairs of appendages, and whose thorax has four, five, orsix pairs of walking legs. Conseil used the methods of our mentorProfessor Milne-Edwards, who puts the decapods in three divisions:Brachyura, Macrura, and Anomura. These names may look a tad fierce,but they’re accurate and appropriate. Among the Brachyura, Conseilmentions some amanthia crabs whose fronts were armed with two bigdiverging tips, those inachus scorpions that—lord knows why—symbolizedwisdom to the ancient Greeks, spider crabs of the massena andspinimane varieties that had probably gone astray in these shallowsbecause they usually live in the lower depths, xanthid crabs, pilumnacrabs, rhomboid crabs, granular box crabs (easy on the digestion, asConseil ventured to observe), toothless masked crabs, ebalia crabs,cymopolia crabs, woolly-handed crabs, etc. Among the Macrura (whichare subdivided into five families: hardshells, burrowers, crayfish,prawns, and ghost crabs) Conseil mentions some common spiny lobsterswhose females supply a meat highly prized, slipper lobsters or commonshrimp, waterside gebia shrimp, and all sorts of edible species, buthe says nothing of the crayfish subdivision that includes the truelobster, because spiny lobsters are the only type in theMediterranean. Finally, among the Anomura, he saw common drocina crabsdwelling inside whatever abandoned seashells they could take over,homola crabs with spiny fronts, hermit crabs, hairy porcelain crabs,etc.There Conseil’s work came to a halt. He didn’t have time to finish offthe class Crustacea through an examination of its stomatopods,amphipods, homopods, isopods, trilobites, branchiopods, ostracods, andentomostraceans. And in order to complete his study of marinearticulates, he needed to mention the class Cirripedia, which containswater fleas and carp lice, plus the class Annelida, which he wouldhave divided without fail into tubifex worms and dorsibranchianworms. But having gone past the shallows of the Strait of Sicily, theNautilus resumed its usual deep-water speed. From then on, no moremollusks, no more zoophytes, no more articulates. Just a few largefish sweeping by like shadows.During the night of February 16-17, we entered the secondMediterranean basin, whose maximum depth we found at 3,000 meters. TheNautilus, driven downward by its propeller and slanting fins,descended to the lowest strata of this sea.There, in place of natural wonders, the watery mass offered somethrilling and dreadful scenes to my eyes. In essence, we were thencrossing that part of the whole Mediterranean so fertile incasualties. From the coast of Algiers to the beaches of Provence, howmany ships have wrecked, how many vessels have vanished! Compared tothe vast liquid plains of the Pacific, the Mediterranean is a merelake, but it’s an unpredictable lake with fickle waves, today kindlyand affectionate to those frail single-masters drifting between adouble ultramarine of sky and water, tomorrow bad-tempered andturbulent, agitated by the winds, demolishing the strongest shipsbeneath sudden waves that smash down with a headlong wallop.So, in our swift cruise through these deep strata, how many vessels Isaw lying on the seafloor, some already caked with coral, others cladonly in a layer of rust, plus anchors, cannons, shells, iron fittings,propeller blades, parts of engines, cracked cylinders, staved-inboilers, then hulls floating in midwater, here upright, thereoverturned.Some of these wrecked ships had perished in collisions, others fromhitting granite reefs. I saw a few that had sunk straight down, theirmasting still upright, their rigging stiffened by the water. Theylooked like they were at anchor by some immense, open, offshoremooring where they were waiting for their departure time. When theNautilus passed between them, covering them with sheets ofelectricity, they seemed ready to salute us with their colors and sendus their serial numbers! But no, nothing but silence and death filledthis field of catastrophes!I observed that these Mediterranean depths became more and morecluttered with such gruesome wreckage as the Nautilus drew nearer tothe Strait of Gibraltar. By then the shores of Africa and Europe wereconverging, and in this narrow space collisions werecommonplace. There I saw numerous iron undersides, the phantasmagoricruins of steamers, some lying down, others rearing up like fearsomeanimals. One of these boats made a dreadful first impression: sidestorn open, funnel bent, paddle wheels stripped to the mountings,rudder separated from the sternpost and still hanging from an ironchain, the board on its stern eaten away by marine salts! How manylives were dashed in this shipwreck! How many victims were swept underthe waves! Had some sailor on board lived to tell the story of thisdreadful disaster, or do the waves still keep this casualty a secret?It occurred to me, lord knows why, that this boat buried under the seamight have been the Atlas, lost with all hands some twenty years agoand never heard from again! Oh, what a gruesome tale theseMediterranean depths could tell, this huge boneyard where so muchwealth has been lost, where so many victims have met their deaths!Meanwhile, briskly unconcerned, the Nautilus ran at full propellerthrough the midst of these ruins. On February 18, near three o’clockin the morning, it hove before the entrance to the Strait ofGibraltar.There are two currents here: an upper current, long known to exist,that carries the ocean’s waters into the Mediterranean basin; then alower countercurrent, the only present-day proof of its existencebeing logic. In essence, the Mediterranean receives a continual influxof water not only from the Atlantic but from rivers emptying into it;since local evaporation isn’t enough to restore the balance, the totalamount of added water should make this sea’s level higher everyyear. Yet this isn’t the case, and we’re naturally forced to believein the existence of some lower current that carries theMediterranean’s surplus through the Strait of Gibraltar and into theAtlantic basin.And so it turned out. The Nautilus took full advantage of thiscountercurrent. It advanced swiftly through this narrowpassageway. For an instant I could glimpse the wonderful ruins of theTemple of Hercules, buried undersea, as Pliny and Avianus havementioned, together with the flat island they stand on; and a fewminutes later, we were floating on the waves of the Atlantic.CHAPTER 8The Bay of VigoTHE ATLANTIC! A vast expanse of water whose surface area is 25,000,000square miles, with a length of 9,000 miles and an average width of2,700. A major sea nearly unknown to the ancients, except perhaps theCarthaginians, those Dutchmen of antiquity who went along the westcoasts of Europe and Africa on their commercial junkets! An oceanwhose parallel winding shores form an immense perimeter fed by theworld’s greatest rivers: the St. Lawrence, Mississippi, Amazon, Plata,Orinoco, Niger, Senegal, Elbe, Loire, and Rhine, which bring it watersfrom the most civilized countries as well as the most undevelopedareas! A magnificent plain of waves plowed continuously by ships ofevery nation, shaded by every flag in the world, and ending in thosetwo dreadful headlands so feared by navigators, Cape Horn and the Capeof Tempests!The Nautilus broke these waters with the edge of its spur after doingnearly 10,000 leagues in three and a half months, a track longer thana great circle of the earth. Where were we heading now, and what didthe future have in store for us?Emerging from the Strait of Gibraltar, the Nautilus took to the highseas. It returned to the surface of the waves, so our daily strolls onthe platform were restored to us.I climbed onto it instantly, Ned Land and Conseil along withme. Twelve miles away, Cape St. Vincent was hazily visible, thesouthwestern tip of the Hispanic peninsula. The wind was blowing apretty strong gust from the south. The sea was swelling andsurging. Its waves made the Nautilus roll and jerk violently. It wasnearly impossible to stand up on the platform, which was continuouslybuffeted by this enormously heavy sea. After inhaling a few breaths ofair, we went below once more.I repaired to my stateroom. Conseil returned to his cabin; but theCanadian, looking rather worried, followed me. Our quick trip throughthe Mediterranean hadn’t allowed him to put his plans into execution,and he could barely conceal his disappointment.After the door to my stateroom was closed, he sat and stared at mesilently.“Ned my friend,” I told him, “I know how you feel, but you mustn’tblame yourself. Given the way the Nautilus was navigating, it wouldhave been sheer insanity to think of escaping!”Ned Land didn’t reply. His pursed lips and frowning brow indicatedthat he was in the grip of his monomania.“Look here,” I went on, “as yet there’s no cause for despair. We’regoing up the coast of Portugal. France and England aren’t far off, andthere we’ll easily find refuge. Oh, I grant you, if the Nautilus hademerged from the Strait of Gibraltar and made for that cape in thesouth, if it were taking us toward those regions that have nocontinents, then I’d share your alarm. But we now know that CaptainNemo doesn’t avoid the seas of civilization, and in a few days I thinkwe can safely take action.”Ned Land stared at me still more intently and finally unpursed hislips:“We’ll do it this evening,” he said.I straightened suddenly. I admit that I was less than ready for thisannouncement. I wanted to reply to the Canadian, but words failed me.“We agreed to wait for the right circumstances,” Ned Land wenton. “Now we’ve got those circumstances. This evening we’ll be just afew miles off the coast of Spain. It’ll be cloudy tonight. The wind’sblowing toward shore. You gave me your promise, Professor Aronnax, andI’m counting on you.”Since I didn’t say anything, the Canadian stood up and approached me:“We’ll do it this evening at nine o’clock,” he said. “I’ve alertedConseil. By that time Captain Nemo will be locked in his room andprobably in bed. Neither the mechanics or the crewmen will be able tosee us. Conseil and I will go to the central companionway. As for you,Professor Aronnax, you’ll stay in the library two steps away and waitfor my signal. The oars, mast, and sail are in the skiff. I’ve evenmanaged to stow some provisions inside. I’ve gotten hold of a monkeywrench to unscrew the nuts bolting the skiff to the Nautilus’shull. So everything’s ready. I’ll see you this evening.”“The sea is rough,” I said.“Admitted,” the Canadian replied, “but we’ve got to risk it. Freedomis worth paying for. Besides, the longboat’s solidly built, and a fewmiles with the wind behind us is no big deal. By tomorrow, who knowsif this ship won’t be 100 leagues out to sea? If circumstances are inour favor, between ten and eleven this evening we’ll be landing onsome piece of solid ground, or we’ll be dead. So we’re in God’s hands,and I’ll see you this evening!”This said, the Canadian withdrew, leaving me close to dumbfounded. Ihad imagined that if it came to this, I would have time to think aboutit, to talk it over. My stubborn companion hadn’t granted me thiscourtesy. But after all, what would I have said to him? Ned Land wasright a hundred times over. These were near-ideal circumstances, andhe was taking full advantage of them. In my selfish personalinterests, could I go back on my word and be responsible for ruiningthe future lives of my companions? Tomorrow, might not Captain Nemotake us far away from any shore?Just then a fairly loud hissing told me that the ballast tanks werefilling, and the Nautilus sank beneath the waves of the Atlantic.I stayed in my stateroom. I wanted to avoid the captain, to hide fromhis eyes the agitation overwhelming me. What an agonizing day I spent,torn between my desire to regain my free will and my regret atabandoning this marvelous Nautilus, leaving my underwater researchincomplete! How could I relinquish this ocean—“my own Atlantic,” as Iliked to call it—without observing its lower strata, without wrestingfrom it the kinds of secrets that had been revealed to me by the seasof the East Indies and the Pacific! I was putting down my novel halfread, I was waking up as my dream neared its climax! How painfully thehours passed, as I sometimes envisioned myself safe on shore with mycompanions, or, despite my better judgment, as I sometimes wished thatsome unforeseen circumstances would prevent Ned Land from carrying outhis plans.Twice I went to the lounge. I wanted to consult the compass. I wantedto see if the Nautilus’s heading was actually taking us closer to thecoast or spiriting us farther away. But no. The Nautilus was still inPortuguese waters. Heading north, it was cruising along the ocean’sbeaches.So I had to resign myself to my fate and get ready to escape. Mybaggage wasn’t heavy. My notes, nothing more.As for Captain Nemo, I wondered what he would make of our escaping,what concern or perhaps what distress it might cause him, and what hewould do in the twofold event of our attempt either failing or beingfound out! Certainly I had no complaints to register with him, on thecontrary. Never was hospitality more wholehearted than his. Yet inleaving him I couldn’t be accused of ingratitude. No solemn promisesbound us to him. In order to keep us captive, he had counted only onthe force of circumstances and not on our word of honor. But hisavowed intention to imprison us forever on his ship justified ourevery effort.I hadn’t seen the captain since our visit to the island ofSantorini. Would fate bring me into his presence before our departure?I both desired and dreaded it. I listened for footsteps in thestateroom adjoining mine. Not a sound reached my ear. His stateroomhad to be deserted.Then I began to wonder if this eccentric individual was even onboard. Since that night when the skiff had left the Nautilus on somemysterious mission, my ideas about him had subtly changed. In spite ofeverything, I thought that Captain Nemo must have kept up some type ofrelationship with the shore. Did he himself never leave the Nautilus?Whole weeks had often gone by without my encountering him. What was hedoing all the while? During all those times I’d thought he wasconvalescing in the grip of some misanthropic fit, was he instead faraway from the ship, involved in some secret activity whose naturestill eluded me?All these ideas and a thousand others assaulted me at the sametime. In these strange circumstances the scope for conjecture wasunlimited. I felt an unbearable queasiness. This day of waiting seemedendless. The hours struck too slowly to keep up with my impatience.As usual, dinner was served me in my stateroom. Full of anxiety, I atelittle. I left the table at seven o’clock. 120 minutes—I was keepingtrack of them—still separated me from the moment I was to rejoin NedLand. My agitation increased. My pulse was throbbing violently. Icouldn’t stand still. I walked up and down, hoping to calm my troubledmind with movement. The possibility of perishing in our recklessundertaking was the least of my worries; my heart was pounding at thethought that our plans might be discovered before we had left theNautilus, at the thought of being hauled in front of Captain Nemo andfinding him angered, or worse, saddened by my deserting him.I wanted to see the lounge one last time. I went down the gangways andarrived at the museum where I had spent so many pleasant andproductive hours. I stared at all its wealth, all its treasures, likea man on the eve of his eternal exile, a man departing to return nomore. For so many days now, these natural wonders and artisticmasterworks had been central to my life, and I was about to leave thembehind forever. I wanted to plunge my eyes through the lounge windowand into these Atlantic waters; but the panels were hermeticallysealed, and a mantle of sheet iron separated me from this ocean withwhich I was still unfamiliar.Crossing through the lounge, I arrived at the door, contrived in oneof the canted corners, that opened into the captain’s stateroom. Muchto my astonishment, this door was ajar. I instinctively recoiled. IfCaptain Nemo was in his stateroom, he might see me. But, not hearingany sounds, I approached. The stateroom was deserted. I pushed thedoor open. I took a few steps inside. Still the same austere, monasticappearance.Just then my eye was caught by some etchings hanging on the wall,which I hadn’t noticed during my first visit. They were portraits ofgreat men of history who had spent their lives in perpetual devotionto a great human ideal: Thaddeus Kosciusko, the hero whose dying wordshad been Finis Poloniae;* Markos Botzaris, for modern Greece thereincarnation of Sparta’s King Leonidas; Daniel O’Connell, Ireland’sdefender; George Washington, founder of the American Union; DanieleManin, the Italian patriot; Abraham Lincoln, dead from the bullet of abeliever in slavery; and finally, that martyr for the redemption ofthe black race, John Brown, hanging from his gallows as Victor Hugo’spencil has so terrifyingly depicted.*Latin: “Save Poland’s borders.” Ed.What was the bond between these heroic souls and the soul of CaptainNemo? From this collection of portraits could I finally unravel themystery of his existence? Was he a fighter for oppressed peoples, aliberator of enslaved races? Had he figured in the recent political orsocial upheavals of this century? Was he a hero of that dreadful civilwar in America, a war lamentable yet forever glorious . . . ?Suddenly the clock struck eight. The first stroke of its hammer on thechime snapped me out of my musings. I shuddered as if some invisibleeye had plunged into my innermost thoughts, and I rushed outside thestateroom.There my eyes fell on the compass. Our heading was stillnortherly. The log indicated a moderate speed, the pressure gauge adepth of about sixty feet. So circumstances were in favor of theCanadian’s plans.I stayed in my stateroom. I dressed warmly: fishing boots, otter cap,coat of fan-mussel fabric lined with sealskin. I was ready. I waswaiting. Only the propeller’s vibrations disturbed the deep silencereigning on board. I cocked an ear and listened. Would a suddenoutburst of voices tell me that Ned Land’s escape plans had just beendetected? A ghastly uneasiness stole through me. I tried in vain torecover my composure.A few minutes before nine o’clock, I glued my ear to the captain’sdoor. Not a sound. I left my stateroom and returned to the lounge,which was deserted and plunged in near darkness.I opened the door leading to the library. The same inadequate light,the same solitude. I went to man my post near the door opening intothe well of the central companionway. I waited for Ned Land’s signal.At this point the propeller’s vibrations slowed down appreciably, thenthey died out altogether. Why was the Nautilus stopping? Whether thislayover would help or hinder Ned Land’s schemes I couldn’t have said.The silence was further disturbed only by the pounding of my heart.Suddenly I felt a mild jolt. I realized the Nautilus had come to reston the ocean floor. My alarm increased. The Canadian’s signal hadn’treached me. I longed to rejoin Ned Land and urge him to postpone hisattempt. I sensed that we were no longer navigating under normalconditions.Just then the door to the main lounge opened and Captain Nemoappeared. He saw me, and without further preamble:“Ah, professor,” he said in an affable tone, “I’ve been looking foryou. Do you know your Spanish history?”Even if he knew it by heart, a man in my disturbed, befuddledcondition couldn’t have quoted a syllable of his own country’shistory.“Well?” Captain Nemo went on. “Did you hear my question? Do you knowthe history of Spain?”“Very little of it,” I replied.“The most learned men,” the captain said, “still have much tolearn. Have a seat,” he added, “and I’ll tell you about an unusualepisode in this body of history.”The captain stretched out on a couch, and I mechanically took a seatnear him, but half in the shadows.“Professor,” he said, “listen carefully. This piece of historyconcerns you in one definite respect, because it will answer aquestion you’ve no doubt been unable to resolve.”“I’m listening, captain,” I said, not knowing what my partner in thisdialogue was driving at, and wondering if this incident related to ourescape plans.“Professor,” Captain Nemo went on, “if you’re amenable, we’ll go backin time to 1702. You’re aware of the fact that in those days your KingLouis XIV thought an imperial gesture would suffice to humble thePyrenees in the dust, so he inflicted his grandson, the Duke of Anjou,on the Spaniards. Reigning more or less poorly under the name KingPhilip V, this aristocrat had to deal with mighty opponents abroad.“In essence, the year before, the royal houses of Holland, Austria,and England had signed a treaty of alliance at The Hague, aiming towrest the Spanish crown from King Philip V and to place it on the headof an archduke whom they prematurely dubbed King Charles III.“Spain had to withstand these allies. But the country had practicallyno army or navy. Yet it wasn’t short of money, provided that itsgalleons, laden with gold and silver from America, could enter itsports. Now then, late in 1702 Spain was expecting a rich convoy, whichFrance ventured to escort with a fleet of twenty-three vessels underthe command of Admiral de Chateau-Renault, because by that time theallied navies were roving the Atlantic.“This convoy was supposed to put into Cadiz, but after learning thatthe English fleet lay across those waterways, the admiral decided tomake for a French port.“The Spanish commanders in the convoy objected to this decision. Theywanted to be taken to a Spanish port, if not to Cadiz, then to the Bayof Vigo, located on Spain’s northwest coast and not blockaded.“Admiral de Chateau-Renault was so indecisive as to obey thisdirective, and the galleons entered the Bay of Vigo.“Unfortunately this bay forms an open, offshore mooring that’simpossible to defend. So it was essential to hurry and empty thegalleons before the allied fleets arrived, and there would have beenample time for this unloading, if a wretched question of tradeagreements hadn’t suddenly come up.“Are you clear on the chain of events?” Captain Nemo asked me.“Perfectly clear,” I said, not yet knowing why I was being given thishistory lesson.“Then I’ll continue. Here’s what came to pass. The tradesmen of Cadizhad negotiated a charter whereby they were to receive all merchandisecoming from the West Indies. Now then, unloading the ingots from thosegalleons at the port of Vigo would have been a violation of theirrights. So they lodged a complaint in Madrid, and they obtained anorder from the indecisive King Philip V: without unloading, the convoywould stay in custody at the offshore mooring of Vigo until the enemyfleets had retreated.“Now then, just as this decision was being handed down, Englishvessels arrived in the Bay of Vigo on October 22, 1702. Despite hisinferior forces, Admiral de Chateau-Renault fought courageously. Butwhen he saw that the convoy’s wealth was about to fall into enemyhands, he burned and scuttled the galleons, which went to the bottomwith their immense treasures.”Captain Nemo stopped. I admit it: I still couldn’t see how this pieceof history concerned me.“Well?” I asked him.“Well, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo answered me, “we’re actuallyin that Bay of Vigo, and all that’s left is for you to probe themysteries of the place.”The captain stood up and invited me to follow him. I’d had time tocollect myself. I did so. The lounge was dark, but the sea’s wavessparkled through the transparent windows. I stared.Around the Nautilus for a half-mile radius, the waters seemedsaturated with electric light. The sandy bottom was clear andbright. Dressed in diving suits, crewmen were busy clearing awayhalf-rotted barrels and disemboweled trunks in the midst of the dingyhulks of ships. Out of these trunks and kegs spilled ingots of goldand silver, cascades of jewels, pieces of eight. The sand was heapedwith them. Then, laden with these valuable spoils, the men returned tothe Nautilus, dropped off their burdens inside, and went to resumethis inexhaustible fishing for silver and gold.I understood. This was the setting of that battle on October 22,1702. Here, in this very place, those galleons carrying treasure tothe Spanish government had gone to the bottom. Here, whenever heneeded, Captain Nemo came to withdraw these millions to ballast hisNautilus. It was for him, for him alone, that America had yielded upits precious metals. He was the direct, sole heir to these treasureswrested from the Incas and those peoples conquered by Hernando Cortez!“Did you know, professor,” he asked me with a smile, “that the seacontained such wealth?”“I know it’s estimated,” I replied, “that there are 2,000,000 metrictons of silver held in suspension in seawater.”“Surely, but in extracting that silver, your expenses would outweighyour profits. Here, by contrast, I have only to pick up what other menhave lost, and not only in this Bay of Vigo but at a thousand othersites where ships have gone down, whose positions are marked on myunderwater chart. Do you understand now that I’m rich to the tune ofbillions?”“I understand, captain. Nevertheless, allow me to inform you that byharvesting this very Bay of Vigo, you’re simply forestalling theefforts of a rival organization.”“What organization?”“A company chartered by the Spanish government to search for thesesunken galleons. The company’s investors were lured by the bait ofenormous gains, because this scuttled treasure is estimated to beworth 500,000,000 francs.”“It was 500,000,000 francs,” Captain Nemo replied, “but no more!”“Right,” I said. “Hence a timely warning to those investors would bean act of charity. Yet who knows if it would be well received? Usuallywhat gamblers regret the most isn’t the loss of their money so much asthe loss of their insane hopes. But ultimately I feel less sorry forthem than for the thousands of unfortunate people who would havebenefited from a fair distribution of this wealth, whereas now it willbe of no help to them!”No sooner had I voiced this regret than I felt it must have woundedCaptain Nemo.“No help!” he replied with growing animation. “Sir, what makes youassume this wealth goes to waste when I’m the one amassing it? Do youthink I toil to gather this treasure out of selfishness? Who says Idon’t put it to good use? Do you think I’m unaware of the sufferingbeings and oppressed races living on this earth, poor people tocomfort, victims to avenge? Don’t you understand . . . ?”Captain Nemo stopped on these last words, perhaps sorry that he hadsaid too much. But I had guessed. Whatever motives had driven him toseek independence under the seas, he remained a human being before allelse! His heart still throbbed for suffering humanity, and his immensephilanthropy went out both to downtrodden races and to individuals!And now I knew where Captain Nemo had delivered those millions, whenthe Nautilus navigated the waters where Crete was in rebellion againstthe Ottoman Empire!CHAPTER 9A Lost ContinentTHE NEXT MORNING, February 19, I beheld the Canadian entering mystateroom. I was expecting this visit. He wore an expression of greatdisappointment.“Well, sir?” he said to me.“Well, Ned, the fates were against us yesterday.”“Yes! That damned captain had to call a halt just as we were going toescape from his boat.”“Yes, Ned, he had business with his bankers.”“His bankers?”“Or rather his bank vaults. By which I mean this ocean, where hiswealth is safer than in any national treasury.”I then related the evening’s incidents to the Canadian, secretlyhoping he would come around to the idea of not deserting the captain;but my narrative had no result other than Ned’s voicing deep regretthat he hadn’t strolled across the Vigo battlefield on his own behalf.“Anyhow,” he said, “it’s not over yet! My first harpoon missed, that’sall! We’ll succeed the next time, and as soon as this evening, if needbe . . .”“What’s the Nautilus’s heading?” I asked.“I’ve no idea,” Ned replied.“All right, at noon we’ll find out what our position is!”The Canadian returned to Conseil’s side. As soon as I was dressed, Iwent into the lounge. The compass wasn’t encouraging. The Nautilus’scourse was south-southwest. We were turning our backs on Europe.I could hardly wait until our position was reported on the chart. Near11:30 the ballast tanks emptied, and the submersible rose to thesurface of the ocean. I leaped onto the platform. Ned Land was alreadythere.No more shore in sight. Nothing but the immenseness of the sea. A fewsails were on the horizon, no doubt ships going as far as Cape SãoRoque to find favorable winds for doubling the Cape of Good Hope. Thesky was overcast. A squall was on the way.Furious, Ned tried to see through the mists on the horizon. He stillhoped that behind all that fog there lay those shores he longed for.At noon the sun made a momentary appearance. Taking advantage of thisrift in the clouds, the chief officer took the orb’s altitude. Thenthe sea grew turbulent, we went below again, and the hatch closed oncemore.When I consulted the chart an hour later, I saw that the Nautilus’sposition was marked at longitude 16 degrees 17’ and latitude 33degrees 22’, a good 150 leagues from the nearest coast. It wouldn’t doto even dream of escaping, and I’ll let the reader decide how promptlythe Canadian threw a tantrum when I ventured to tell him oursituation.As for me, I wasn’t exactly grief-stricken. I felt as if a heavyweight had been lifted from me, and I was able to resume my regulartasks in a state of comparative calm.Near eleven o’clock in the evening, I received a most unexpected visitfrom Captain Nemo. He asked me very graciously if I felt exhaustedfrom our vigil the night before. I said no.“Then, Professor Aronnax, I propose an unusual excursion.”“Propose away, captain.”“So far you’ve visited the ocean depths only by day and undersunlight. Would you like to see these depths on a dark night?”“Very much.”“I warn you, this will be an exhausting stroll. We’ll need to walklong hours and scale a mountain. The roads aren’t terribly well keptup.”“Everything you say, captain, just increases my curiosity. I’m readyto go with you.”“Then come along, professor, and we’ll go put on our diving suits.”Arriving at the wardrobe, I saw that neither my companions nor anycrewmen would be coming with us on this excursion. Captain Nemo hadn’teven suggested my fetching Ned or Conseil.In a few moments we had put on our equipment. Air tanks, abundantlycharged, were placed on our backs, but the electric lamps were not inreadiness. I commented on this to the captain.“They’ll be useless to us,” he replied.I thought I hadn’t heard him right, but I couldn’t repeat my commentbecause the captain’s head had already disappeared into its metalcovering. I finished harnessing myself, I felt an alpenstock beingplaced in my hand, and a few minutes later, after the usualprocedures, we set foot on the floor of the Atlantic, 300 meters down.Midnight was approaching. The waters were profoundly dark, but CaptainNemo pointed to a reddish spot in the distance, a sort of wide glowshimmering about two miles from the Nautilus. What this fire was, whatsubstances fed it, how and why it kept burning in the liquid mass, Icouldn’t say. Anyhow it lit our way, although hazily, but I soon grewaccustomed to this unique gloom, and in these circumstances Iunderstood the uselessness of the Ruhmkorff device.Side by side, Captain Nemo and I walked directly toward thisconspicuous flame. The level seafloor rose imperceptibly. We took longstrides, helped by our alpenstocks; but in general our progress wasslow, because our feet kept sinking into a kind of slimy mud mixedwith seaweed and assorted flat stones.As we moved forward, I heard a kind of pitter-patter above myhead. Sometimes this noise increased and became a continuouscrackle. I soon realized the cause. It was a heavy rainfall rattlingon the surface of the waves. Instinctively I worried that I might getsoaked! By water in the midst of water! I couldn’t help smiling atthis outlandish notion. But to tell the truth, wearing these heavydiving suits, you no longer feel the liquid element, you simply thinkyou’re in the midst of air a little denser than air on land, that’sall.After half an hour of walking, the seafloor grew rocky. Jellyfish,microscopic crustaceans, and sea-pen coral lit it faintly with theirphosphorescent glimmers. I glimpsed piles of stones covered by acouple million zoophytes and tangles of algae. My feet often slippedon this viscous seaweed carpet, and without my alpenstock I would havefallen more than once. When I turned around, I could still see theNautilus’s whitish beacon, which was starting to grow pale in thedistance.Those piles of stones just mentioned were laid out on the ocean floorwith a distinct but inexplicable symmetry. I spotted gigantic furrowstrailing off into the distant darkness, their lengthincalculable. There also were other peculiarities I couldn’t makesense of. It seemed to me that my heavy lead soles were crushing alitter of bones that made a dry crackling noise. So what were thesevast plains we were now crossing? I wanted to ask the captain, but Istill didn’t grasp that sign language that allowed him to chat withhis companions when they went with him on his underwater excursions.Meanwhile the reddish light guiding us had expanded and inflamed thehorizon. The presence of this furnace under the waters had meextremely puzzled. Was it some sort of electrical discharge? Was Iapproaching some natural phenomenon still unknown to scientists onshore? Or, rather (and this thought did cross my mind), had the handof man intervened in that blaze? Had human beings fanned those flames?In these deep strata would I meet up with more of Captain Nemo’scompanions, friends he was about to visit who led lives as strange ashis own? Would I find a whole colony of exiles down here, men tired ofthe world’s woes, men who had sought and found independence in theocean’s lower depths? All these insane, inadmissible ideas dogged me,and in this frame of mind, continually excited by the series ofwonders passing before my eyes, I wouldn’t have been surprised to findon this sea bottom one of those underwater towns Captain Nemo dreamedabout!Our path was getting brighter and brighter. The red glow had turnedwhite and was radiating from a mountain peak about 800 feet high. Butwhat I saw was simply a reflection produced by the crystal waters ofthese strata. The furnace that was the source of this inexplicablelight occupied the far side of the mountain.In the midst of the stone mazes furrowing this Atlantic seafloor,Captain Nemo moved forward without hesitation. He knew this darkpath. No doubt he had often traveled it and was incapable of losinghis way. I followed him with unshakeable confidence. He seemed likesome Spirit of the Sea, and as he walked ahead of me, I marveled athis tall figure, which stood out in black against the glowingbackground of the horizon.It was one o’clock in the morning. We arrived at the mountain’s lowergradients. But in grappling with them, we had to venture up difficulttrails through a huge thicket.Yes, a thicket of dead trees! Trees without leaves, without sap,turned to stone by the action of the waters, and crowned here andthere by gigantic pines. It was like a still-erect coalfield, itsroots clutching broken soil, its boughs clearly outlined against theceiling of the waters like thin, black, paper cutouts. Picture aforest clinging to the sides of a peak in the Harz Mountains, but asubmerged forest. The trails were cluttered with algae and fucusplants, hosts of crustaceans swarming among them. I plunged on,scaling rocks, straddling fallen tree trunks, snapping marine creepersthat swayed from one tree to another, startling the fish that flittedfrom branch to branch. Carried away, I didn’t feel exhausted anymore. I followed a guide who was immune to exhaustion.What a sight! How can I describe it! How can I portray these woods androcks in this liquid setting, their lower parts dark and sullen, theirupper parts tinted red in this light whose intensity was doubled bythe reflecting power of the waters! We scaled rocks that crumbledbehind us, collapsing in enormous sections with the hollow rumble ofan avalanche. To our right and left there were carved gloomy gallerieswhere the eye lost its way. Huge glades opened up, seemingly clearedby the hand of man, and I sometimes wondered whether some residents ofthese underwater regions would suddenly appear before me.But Captain Nemo kept climbing. I didn’t want to fall behind. Ifollowed him boldly. My alpenstock was a great help. One wrong stepwould have been disastrous on the narrow paths cut into the sides ofthese chasms, but I walked along with a firm tread and without theslightest feeling of dizziness. Sometimes I leaped over a crevassewhose depth would have made me recoil had I been in the midst ofglaciers on shore; sometimes I ventured out on a wobbling tree trunkfallen across a gorge, without looking down, having eyes only formarveling at the wild scenery of this region. There, leaning onerratically cut foundations, monumental rocks seemed to defy the lawsof balance. From between their stony knees, trees sprang up like jetsunder fearsome pressure, supporting other trees that supported them inturn. Next, natural towers with wide, steeply carved battlementsleaned at angles that, on dry land, the laws of gravity would neverhave authorized.And I too could feel the difference created by the water’s powerfuldensity—despite my heavy clothing, copper headpiece, and metal soles,I climbed the most impossibly steep gradients with all the nimbleness,I swear it, of a chamois or a Pyrenees mountain goat!As for my account of this excursion under the waters, I’m well awarethat it sounds incredible! I’m the chronicler of deeds seeminglyimpossible and yet incontestably real. This was no fantasy. This waswhat I saw and felt!Two hours after leaving the Nautilus, we had cleared the timberline,and 100 feet above our heads stood the mountain peak, forming a darksilhouette against the brilliant glare that came from its farslope. Petrified shrubs rambled here and there in sprawlingzigzags. Fish rose in a body at our feet like birds startled in tallgrass. The rocky mass was gouged with impenetrable crevices, deepcaves, unfathomable holes at whose far ends I could hear fearsomethings moving around. My blood would curdle as I watched some enormousantenna bar my path, or saw some frightful pincer snap shut in theshadow of some cavity! A thousand specks of light glittered in themidst of the gloom. They were the eyes of gigantic crustaceanscrouching in their lairs, giant lobsters rearing up like spearcarriers and moving their claws with a scrap-iron clanking, titaniccrabs aiming their bodies like cannons on their carriages, and hideousdevilfish intertwining their tentacles like bushes of writhing snakes.What was this astounding world that I didn’t yet know? In what orderdid these articulates belong, these creatures for which the rocksprovided a second carapace? Where had nature learned the secret oftheir vegetating existence, and for how many centuries had they livedin the ocean’s lower strata?But I couldn’t linger. Captain Nemo, on familiar terms with thesedreadful animals, no longer minded them. We arrived at a preliminaryplateau where still other surprises were waiting for me. Therepicturesque ruins took shape, betraying the hand of man, not ourCreator. They were huge stacks of stones in which you coulddistinguish the indistinct forms of palaces and temples, now arrayedin hosts of blossoming zoophytes, and over it all, not ivy but a heavymantle of algae and fucus plants.But what part of the globe could this be, this land swallowed bycataclysms? Who had set up these rocks and stones like the dolmens ofprehistoric times? Where was I, where had Captain Nemo’s fancies takenme?I wanted to ask him. Unable to, I stopped him. I seized his arm. Buthe shook his head, pointed to the mountain’s topmost peak, and seemedto tell me:“Come on! Come with me! Come higher!”I followed him with one last burst of energy, and in a few minutes Ihad scaled the peak, which crowned the whole rocky mass by some tenmeters.I looked back down the side we had just cleared. There the mountainrose only 700 to 800 feet above the plains; but on its far slope itcrowned the receding bottom of this part of the Atlantic by a heighttwice that. My eyes scanned the distance and took in a vast area litby intense flashes of light. In essence, this mountain was avolcano. Fifty feet below its peak, amid a shower of stones and slag,a wide crater vomited torrents of lava that were dispersed in fierycascades into the heart of the liquid mass. So situated, this volcanowas an immense torch that lit up the lower plains all the way to thehorizon.As I said, this underwater crater spewed lava, but not flames. Flamesneed oxygen from the air and are unable to spread underwater; but alava flow, which contains in itself the principle of itsincandescence, can rise to a white heat, overpower the liquid element,and turn it into steam on contact. Swift currents swept away all thisdiffuse gas, and torrents of lava slid to the foot of the mountain,like the disgorgings of a Mt. Vesuvius over the city limits of asecond Torre del Greco.In fact, there beneath my eyes was a town in ruins, demolished,overwhelmed, laid low, its roofs caved in, its temples pulled down,its arches dislocated, its columns stretching over the earth; in theseruins you could still detect the solid proportions of a sort of Tuscanarchitecture; farther off, the remains of a gigantic aqueduct; here,the caked heights of an acropolis along with the fluid forms of aParthenon; there, the remnants of a wharf, as if some bygone port hadlong ago harbored merchant vessels and triple-tiered war galleys onthe shores of some lost ocean; still farther off, long rows ofcollapsing walls, deserted thoroughfares, a whole Pompeii buried underthe waters, which Captain Nemo had resurrected before my eyes!Where was I? Where was I? I had to find out at all cost, I wanted tospeak, I wanted to rip off the copper sphere imprisoning my head.But Captain Nemo came over and stopped me with a gesture. Then,picking up a piece of chalky stone, he advanced to a black basalticrock and scrawled this one word:ATLANTISWhat lightning flashed through my mind! Atlantis, that ancient land ofMeropis mentioned by the historian Theopompus; Plato’s Atlantis; thecontinent whose very existence has been denied by such philosophersand scientists as Origen, Porphyry, Iamblichus, d’Anville, Malte-Brun,and Humboldt, who entered its disappearance in the ledger of myths andfolk tales; the country whose reality has nevertheless been acceptedby such other thinkers as Posidonius, Pliny, Ammianus Marcellinus,Tertullian, Engel, Scherer, Tournefort, Buffon, and d’Avezac; I hadthis land right under my eyes, furnishing its own unimpeachableevidence of the catastrophe that had overtaken it! So this was thesubmerged region that had existed outside Europe, Asia, and Libya,beyond the Pillars of Hercules, home of those powerful Atlanteanpeople against whom ancient Greece had waged its earliest wars!The writer whose narratives record the lofty deeds of those heroictimes is Plato himself. His dialogues Timaeus and Critias were draftedwith the poet and legislator Solon as their inspiration, as it were.One day Solon was conversing with some elderly wise men in theEgyptian capital of Sais, a town already 8,000 years of age, asdocumented by the annals engraved on the sacred walls of itstemples. One of these elders related the history of another town 1,000years older still. This original city of Athens, ninety centuries old,had been invaded and partly destroyed by the Atlanteans. TheseAtlanteans, he said, resided on an immense continent greater thanAfrica andAsia combined, taking in an area that lay between latitude 12 degreesand 40 degrees north. Their dominion extended even to Egypt. Theytried to enforce their rule as far as Greece, but they had to retreatbefore the indomitable resistance of the Hellenic people. Centuriespassed. A cataclysm occurred—floods, earthquakes. A single night andday were enough to obliterate this Atlantis, whose highest peaks(Madeira, the Azores, the Canaries, the Cape Verde Islands) stillemerge above the waves.These were the historical memories that Captain Nemo’s scrawl sentrushing through my mind. Thus, led by the strangest of fates, I wastreading underfoot one of the mountains of that continent! My handswere touching ruins many thousands of years old, contemporary withprehistoric times! I was walking in the very place wherecontemporaries of early man had walked! My heavy soles were crushingthe skeletons of animals from the age of fable, animals that used totake cover in the shade of these trees now turned to stone!Oh, why was I so short of time! I would have gone down the steepslopes of this mountain, crossed this entire immense continent, whichsurely connects Africa with America, and visited its great prehistoriccities. Under my eyes there perhaps lay the warlike town of Makhimosor the pious village of Eusebes, whose gigantic inhabitants lived forwhole centuries and had the strength to raise blocks of stone thatstill withstood the action of the waters. One day perhaps, somevolcanic phenomenon will bring these sunken ruins back to the surfaceof the waves! Numerous underwater volcanoes have been sighted in thispart of the ocean, and many ships have felt terrific tremors whenpassing over these turbulent depths. A few have heard hollow noisesthat announced some struggle of the elements far below, others havehauled in volcanic ash hurled above the waves. As far as the equatorthis whole seafloor is still under construction by plutonicforces. And in some remote epoch, built up by volcanic disgorgings andsuccessive layers of lava, who knows whether the peaks of thesefire-belching mountains may reappear above the surface of theAtlantic!As I mused in this way, trying to establish in my memory every detailof this impressive landscape, Captain Nemo was leaning his elbows on amoss-covered monument, motionless as if petrified in some mutetrance. Was he dreaming of those lost generations, asking them for thesecret of human destiny? Was it here that this strange man came torevive himself, basking in historical memories, reliving that bygonelife, he who had no desire for our modern one? I would have givenanything to know his thoughts, to share them, understand them!We stayed in this place an entire hour, contemplating its vast plainsin the lava’s glow, which sometimes took on a startlingintensity. Inner boilings sent quick shivers running through themountain’s crust. Noises from deep underneath, clearly transmitted bythe liquid medium, reverberated with majestic amplitude.Just then the moon appeared for an instant through the watery mass,casting a few pale rays over this submerged continent. It was only afleeting glimmer, but its effect was indescribable. The captain stoodup and took one last look at these immense plains; then his handsignaled me to follow him.We went swiftly down the mountain. Once past the petrified forest, Icould see the Nautilus’s beacon twinkling like a star. The captainwalked straight toward it, and we were back on board just as the firstglimmers of dawn were whitening the surface of the ocean.CHAPTER 10The Underwater CoalfieldsTHE NEXT DAY, February 20, I overslept. I was so exhausted from thenight before, I didn’t get up until eleven o’clock. I dressedquickly. I hurried to find out the Nautilus’s heading. The instrumentsindicated that it was running southward at a speed of twenty miles perhour and a depth of 100 meters.Conseil entered. I described our nocturnal excursion to him, and sincethe panels were open, he could still catch a glimpse of this submergedcontinent.In fact, the Nautilus was skimming only ten meters over the soil ofthese Atlantis plains. The ship scudded along like an air balloonborne by the wind over some prairie on land; but it would be moreaccurate to say that we sat in the lounge as if we were riding in acoach on an express train. As for the foregrounds passing before oureyes, they were fantastically carved rocks, forests of trees that hadcrossed over from the vegetable kingdom into the mineral kingdom,their motionless silhouettes sprawling beneath the waves. There alsowere stony masses buried beneath carpets of axidia and sea anemone,bristling with long, vertical water plants, then strangely contouredblocks of lava that testified to all the fury of those plutonicdevelopments.While this bizarre scenery was glittering under our electric beams, Itold Conseil the story of the Atlanteans, who had inspired the oldFrench scientist Jean Bailly to write so many entertaining—albeitutterly fictitious—pages.* I told the lad about the wars of theseheroic people. I discussed the question of Atlantis with the fervor ofa man who no longer had any doubts. But Conseil was so distracted hebarely heard me, and his lack of interest in any commentary on thishistorical topic was soon explained.*Bailly believed that Atlantis was located at the North Pole! Ed.In essence, numerous fish had caught his eye, and when fish pass by,Conseil vanishes into his world of classifying and leaves real lifebehind. In which case I could only tag along and resume ourichthyological research.Even so, these Atlantic fish were not noticeably different from thosewe had observed earlier. There were rays of gigantic size, five meterslong and with muscles so powerful they could leap above the waves,sharks of various species including a fifteen-foot glaucous shark withsharp triangular teeth and so transparent it was almost invisible amidthe waters, brown lantern sharks, prism-shaped humantin sharks armoredwith protuberant hides, sturgeons resembling their relatives in theMediterranean, trumpet-snouted pipefish a foot and a half long,yellowish brown with small gray fins and no teeth or tongue, unreelinglike slim, supple snakes.Among bony fish, Conseil noticed some blackish marlin three meterslong with a sharp sword jutting from the upper jaw, bright-coloredweevers known in Aristotle’s day as sea dragons and whose dorsalstingers make them quite dangerous to pick up, then dolphinfish withbrown backs striped in blue and edged in gold, handsome dorados,moonlike opahs that look like azure disks but which the sun’s raysturn into spots of silver, finally eight-meter swordfish from thegenus Xiphias, swimming in schools, sporting yellowish sickle-shapedfins and six-foot broadswords, stalwart animals, plant eaters ratherthan fish eaters, obeying the tiniest signals from their females likehenpecked husbands.But while observing these different specimens of marine fauna, Ididn’t stop examining the long plains of Atlantis. Sometimes anunpredictable irregularity in the seafloor would force the Nautilus toslow down, and then it would glide into the narrow channels betweenthe hills with a cetacean’s dexterity. If the labyrinth becamehopelessly tangled, the submersible would rise above it like anairship, and after clearing the obstacle, it would resume its speedycourse just a few meters above the ocean floor. It was an enjoyableand impressive way of navigating that did indeed recall the maneuversof an airship ride, with the major difference that the Nautilusfaithfully obeyed the hands of its helmsman.The terrain consisted mostly of thick slime mixed with petrifiedbranches, but it changed little by little near four o’clock in theafternoon; it grew rockier and seemed to be strewn with pudding stonesand a basaltic gravel called “tuff,” together with bits of lava andsulfurous obsidian. I expected these long plains to change intomountain regions, and in fact, as the Nautilus was executing certainturns, I noticed that the southerly horizon was blocked by a high wallthat seemed to close off every exit. Its summit obviously poked abovethe level of the ocean. It had to be a continent or at least anisland, either one of the Canaries or one of the Cape VerdeIslands. Our bearings hadn’t been marked on the chart—perhapsdeliberately—and I had no idea what our position was. In any case thiswall seemed to signal the end of Atlantis, of which, all in all, wehad crossed only a small part.Nightfall didn’t interrupt my observations. I was left tomyself. Conseil had repaired to his cabin. The Nautilus slowed down,hovering above the muddled masses on the seafloor, sometimes grazingthem as if wanting to come to rest, sometimes rising unpredictably tothe surface of the waves. Then I glimpsed a few bright constellationsthrough the crystal waters, specifically five or six of those zodiacalstars trailing from the tail end of Orion.I would have stayed longer at my window, marveling at these beautiesof sea and sky, but the panels closed. Just then the Nautilus hadarrived at the perpendicular face of that high wall. How the shipwould maneuver I hadn’t a guess. I repaired to my stateroom. TheNautilus did not stir. I fell asleep with the firm intention of wakingup in just a few hours.But it was eight o’clock the next day when I returned to the lounge. Istared at the pressure gauge. It told me that the Nautilus was afloaton the surface of the ocean. Furthermore, I heard the sound offootsteps on the platform. Yet there were no rolling movements toindicate the presence of waves undulating above me.I climbed as far as the hatch. It was open. But instead of the broaddaylight I was expecting, I found that I was surrounded by totaldarkness. Where were we? Had I been mistaken? Was it still night? No!Not one star was twinkling, and nighttime is never so utterly black.I wasn’t sure what to think, when a voice said to me:“Is that you, professor?”“Ah, Captain Nemo!” I replied. “Where are we?”“Underground, professor.”“Underground!” I exclaimed. “And the Nautilus is still floating?”“It always floats.”“But I don’t understand!”“Wait a little while. Our beacon is about to go on, and if you wantsome light on the subject, you’ll be satisfied.”I set foot on the platform and waited. The darkness was so profound Icouldn’t see even Captain Nemo. However, looking at the zenithdirectly overhead, I thought I caught sight of a feeble glimmer, asort of twilight filtering through a circular hole. Just then thebeacon suddenly went on, and its intense brightness made that hazylight vanish.This stream of electricity dazzled my eyes, and after momentarilyshutting them, I looked around. The Nautilus was stationary. It wasfloating next to an embankment shaped like a wharf. As for the waternow buoying the ship, it was a lake completely encircled by an innerwall about two miles in diameter, hence six miles around. Its level—asindicated by the pressure gauge—would be the same as the outsidelevel, because some connection had to exist between this lake and thesea. Slanting inward over their base, these high walls converged toform a vault shaped like an immense upside-down funnel that measured500 or 600 meters in height. At its summit there gaped the circularopening through which I had detected that faint glimmer, obviouslydaylight.Before more carefully examining the interior features of this enormouscavern, and before deciding if it was the work of nature or humankind,I went over to Captain Nemo.“Where are we?” I said.“In the very heart of an extinct volcano,” the captain answered me, “avolcano whose interior was invaded by the sea after some convulsion inthe earth. While you were sleeping, professor, the Nautilus enteredthis lagoon through a natural channel that opens ten meters below thesurface of the ocean. This is our home port, secure, convenient,secret, and sheltered against winds from any direction! Along thecoasts of your continents or islands, show me any offshore mooringthat can equal this safe refuge for withstanding the fury ofhurricanes.”“Indeed,” I replied, “here you’re in perfect safety, Captain Nemo. Whocould reach you in the heart of a volcano? But don’t I see an openingat its summit?”“Yes, its crater, a crater formerly filled with lava, steam, andflames, but which now lets in this life-giving air we’re breathing.”“But which volcanic mountain is this?” I asked.“It’s one of the many islets with which this sea is strewn. For shipsa mere reef, for us an immense cavern. I discovered it by chance, andchance served me well.”“But couldn’t someone enter through the mouth of its crater?”“No more than I could exit through it. You can climb about 100 feet upthe inner base of this mountain, but then the walls overhang, theylean too far in to be scaled.”“I can see, captain, that nature is your obedient servant, any time orany place. You’re safe on this lake, and nobody else can visit itswaters. But what’s the purpose of this refuge? The Nautilus doesn’tneed a harbor.”“No, professor, but it needs electricity to run, batteries to generateits electricity, sodium to feed its batteries, coal to make itssodium, and coalfields from which to dig its coal. Now then, right atthis spot the sea covers entire forests that sank underwater inprehistoric times; today, turned to stone, transformed into carbonfuel, they offer me inexhaustible coal mines.”“So, captain, your men practice the trade of miners here?”“Precisely. These mines extend under the waves like the coalfields atNewcastle. Here, dressed in diving suits, pick and mattock in hand, mymen go out and dig this carbon fuel for which I don’t need a singlemine on land. When I burn this combustible to produce sodium, thesmoke escaping from the mountain’s crater gives it the appearance of astill-active volcano.”“And will we see your companions at work?”“No, at least not this time, because I’m eager to continue ourunderwater tour of the world. Accordingly, I’ll rest content withdrawing on my reserve stock of sodium. We’ll stay here long enough toload it on board, in other words, a single workday, then we’ll resumeour voyage. So, Professor Aronnax, if you’d like to explore thiscavern and circle its lagoon, seize the day.”I thanked the captain and went to look for my two companions, whohadn’t yet left their cabin. I invited them to follow me, not tellingthem where we were.They climbed onto the platform. Conseil, whom nothing could startle,saw it as a perfectly natural thing to fall asleep under the waves andwake up under a mountain. But Ned Land had no idea in his head otherthan to see if this cavern offered some way out.After breakfast near ten o’clock, we went down onto the embankment.“So here we are, back on shore,” Conseil said.“I’d hardly call this shore,” the Canadian replied. “And besides, wearen’t on it but under it.”A sandy beach unfolded before us, measuring 500 feet at its widestpoint between the waters of the lake and the foot of the mountain’swalls. Via this strand you could easily circle the lake. But the baseof these high walls consisted of broken soil over which there laypicturesque piles of volcanic blocks and enormous pumice stones. Allthese crumbling masses were covered with an enamel polished by theaction of underground fires, and they glistened under the stream ofelectric light from our beacon. Stirred up by our footsteps, themica-rich dust on this beach flew into the air like a cloud of sparks.The ground rose appreciably as it moved away from the sand flats bythe waves, and we soon arrived at some long, winding gradients,genuinely steep paths that allowed us to climb little by little; butwe had to tread cautiously in the midst of pudding stones that weren’tcemented together, and our feet kept skidding on glassy trachyte, madeof feldspar and quartz crystals.The volcanic nature of this enormous pit was apparent all around us. Iventured to comment on it to my companions.“Can you picture,” I asked them, “what this funnel must have been likewhen it was filled with boiling lava, and the level of thatincandescent liquid rose right to the mountain’s mouth, like cast ironup the insides of a furnace?”“I can picture it perfectly,” Conseil replied. “But will master tellme why this huge smelter suspended operations, and how it is that anoven was replaced by the tranquil waters of a lake?”“In all likelihood, Conseil, because some convulsion created anopening below the surface of the ocean, the opening that serves as apassageway for the Nautilus. Then the waters of the Atlantic rushedinside the mountain. There ensued a dreadful struggle between theelements of fire and water, a struggle ending in King Neptune’sfavor. But many centuries have passed since then, and this submergedvolcano has changed into a peaceful cavern.”“That’s fine,” Ned Land answered. “I accept the explanation, but inour personal interests, I’m sorry this opening the professor mentionswasn’t made above sea level.”“But Ned my friend,” Conseil answered, “if it weren’t an underwaterpassageway, the Nautilus couldn’t enter it!”“And I might add, Mr. Land,” I said, “that the waters wouldn’t haverushed under the mountain, and the volcano would still be avolcano. So you have nothing to be sorry about.”Our climb continued. The gradients got steeper and narrower. Sometimesthey were cut across by deep pits that had to be cleared. Masses ofoverhanging rock had to be gotten around. You slid on your knees, youcrept on your belly. But helped by the Canadian’s strength andConseil’s dexterity, we overcame every obstacle.At an elevation of about thirty meters, the nature of the terrainchanged without becoming any easier. Pudding stones and trachyte gaveway to black basaltic rock: here, lying in slabs all swollen withblisters; there, shaped like actual prisms and arranged into a seriesof columns that supported the springings of this immense vault, awonderful sample of natural architecture. Then, among this basalticrock, there snaked long, hardened lava flows inlaid with veins ofbituminous coal and in places covered by wide carpets of sulfur. Thesunshine coming through the crater had grown stronger, shedding a hazylight over all the volcanic waste forever buried in the heart of thisextinct mountain.But when we had ascended to an elevation of about 250 feet, we werestopped by insurmountable obstacles. The converging inside wallschanged into overhangs, and our climb into a circular stroll. At thistopmost level the vegetable kingdom began to challenge the mineralkingdom. Shrubs, and even a few trees, emerged from crevices in thewalls. I recognized some spurges that let their caustic, purgative saptrickle out. There were heliotropes, very remiss at living up to theirsun-worshipping reputations since no sunlight ever reached them; theirclusters of flowers drooped sadly, their colors and scents werefaded. Here and there chrysanthemums sprouted timidly at the feet ofaloes with long, sad, sickly leaves. But between these lava flows Ispotted little violets that still gave off a subtle fragrance, and Iconfess that I inhaled it with delight. The soul of a flower is itsscent, and those splendid water plants, flowers of the sea, have nosouls!We had arrived at the foot of a sturdy clump of dragon trees, whichwere splitting the rocks with exertions of their muscular roots, whenNed Land exclaimed:“Oh, sir, a hive!”“A hive?” I answered, with a gesture of utter disbelief.“Yes, a hive,” the Canadian repeated, “with bees buzzing around!”I went closer and was forced to recognize the obvious. At the mouth ofa hole cut in the trunk of a dragon tree, there swarmed thousands ofthese ingenious insects so common to all the Canary Islands, wheretheir output is especially prized.Naturally enough, the Canadian wanted to lay in a supply of honey, andit would have been ill-mannered of me to say no. He mixed sulfur withsome dry leaves, set them on fire with a spark from his tinderbox, andproceeded to smoke the bees out. Little by little the buzzing dieddown and the disemboweled hive yielded several pounds of sweethoney. Ned Land stuffed his haversack with it.“When I’ve mixed this honey with our breadfruit batter,” he told us,“I’ll be ready to serve you a delectable piece of cake.”“But of course,” Conseil put in, “it will be gingerbread!”“I’m all for gingerbread,” I said, “but let’s resume this fascinatingstroll.”At certain turns in the trail we were going along, the lake appearedin its full expanse. The ship’s beacon lit up that whole placidsurface, which experienced neither ripples nor undulations. TheNautilus lay perfectly still. On its platform and on the embankment,crewmen were bustling around, black shadows that stood out clearly inthe midst of the luminous air.Just then we went around the highest ridge of these rocky foothillsthat supported the vault. Then I saw that bees weren’t the animalkingdom’s only representatives inside this volcano. Here and in theshadows, birds of prey soared and whirled, flying away from nestsperched on tips of rock. There were sparrow hawks with white bellies,and screeching kestrels. With all the speed their stiltlike legs couldmuster, fine fat bustards scampered over the slopes. I’ll let thereader decide whether the Canadian’s appetite was aroused by the sightof this tasty game, and whether he regretted having no rifle in hishands. He tried to make stones do the work of bullets, and afterseveral fruitless attempts, he managed to wound one of thesemagnificent bustards. To say he risked his life twenty times in orderto capture this bird is simply the unadulterated truth; but he faredso well, the animal went into his sack to join the honeycombs.By then we were forced to go back down to the beach because the ridgehad become impossible. Above us, the yawning crater looked like thewide mouth of a well. From where we stood, the sky was pretty easy tosee, and I watched clouds race by, disheveled by the west wind,letting tatters of mist trail over the mountain’s summit. Proofpositive that those clouds kept at a moderate altitude, because thisvolcano didn’t rise more than 1,800 feet above the level of the ocean.Half an hour after the Canadian’s latest exploits, we were back on theinner beach. There the local flora was represented by a wide carpet ofsamphire, a small umbelliferous plant that keeps quite nicely, whichalso boasts the names glasswort, saxifrage, and sea fennel. Conseilpicked a couple bunches. As for the local fauna, it included thousandsof crustaceans of every type: lobsters, hermit crabs, prawns, mysidshrimps, daddy longlegs, rock crabs, and a prodigious number ofseashells, such as cowries, murex snails, and limpets.In this locality there gaped the mouth of a magnificent cave. Mycompanions and I took great pleasure in stretching out on itsfine-grained sand. Fire had polished the sparkling enamel of its innerwalls, sprinkled all over with mica-rich dust. Ned Land tapped thesewalls and tried to probe their thickness. I couldn’t help smiling. Ourconversation then turned to his everlasting escape plans, and withoutgoing too far, I felt I could offer him this hope: Captain Nemo hadgone down south only to replenish his sodium supplies. So I hoped hewould now hug the coasts of Europe and America, which would allow theCanadian to try again with a greater chance of success.We were stretched out in this delightful cave for an hour. Ourconversation, lively at the outset, then languished. A definitedrowsiness overcame us. Since I saw no good reason to resist the callof sleep, I fell into a heavy doze. I dreamed—one doesn’t choose hisdreams—that my life had been reduced to the vegetating existence of asimple mollusk. It seemed to me that this cave made up mydouble-valved shell. . . .Suddenly Conseil’s voice startled me awake.“Get up! Get up!” shouted the fine lad.“What is it?” I asked, in a sitting position.“The water’s coming up to us!”I got back on my feet. Like a torrent the sea was rushing into ourretreat, and since we definitely were not mollusks, we had to clearout.In a few seconds we were safe on top of the cave.“What happened?” Conseil asked. “Some new phenomenon?”“Not quite, my friends!” I replied. “It was the tide, merely the tide,which wellnigh caught us by surprise just as it did Sir Walter Scott’shero! The ocean outside is rising, and by a perfectly natural law ofbalance, the level of this lake is also rising. We’ve gotten off witha mild dunking. Let’s go change clothes on the Nautilus.”Three-quarters of an hour later, we had completed our circular strolland were back on board. Just then the crewmen finished loading thesodium supplies, and the Nautilus could have departed immediately.But Captain Nemo gave no orders. Would he wait for nightfall and exitthrough his underwater passageway in secrecy? Perhaps.Be that as it may, by the next day the Nautilus had left its home portand was navigating well out from any shore, a few meters beneath thewaves of the Atlantic.CHAPTER 11The Sargasso SeaTHE NAUTILUS didn’t change direction. For the time being, then, we hadto set aside any hope of returning to European seas. Captain Nemo kepthis prow pointing south. Where was he taking us? I was afraid toguess.That day the Nautilus crossed an odd part of the Atlantic Ocean. Noone is unaware of the existence of that great warm-water current knownby name as the Gulf Stream. After emerging from channels off Florida,it heads toward Spitzbergen. But before entering the Gulf of Mexiconear latitude 44 degrees north, this current divides into two arms;its chief arm makes for the shores of Ireland and Norway while thesecond flexes southward at the level of the Azores; then it hits thecoast of Africa, sweeps in a long oval, and returns to the CaribbeanSea.Now then, this second arm—more accurately, a collar—forms a ring ofwarm water around a section of cool, tranquil, motionless ocean calledthe Sargasso Sea. This is an actual lake in the open Atlantic, and thegreat current’s waters take at least three years to circle it.Properly speaking, the Sargasso Sea covers every submerged part ofAtlantis. Certain authors have even held that the many weeds strewnover this sea were torn loose from the prairies of that ancientcontinent. But it’s more likely that these grasses, algae, and fucusplants were carried off from the beaches of Europe and America, thentaken as far as this zone by the Gulf Stream. This is one of thereasons why Christopher Columbus assumed the existence of a NewWorld. When the ships of that bold investigator arrived in theSargasso Sea, they had great difficulty navigating in the midst ofthese weeds, which, much to their crews’ dismay, slowed them down to ahalt; and they wasted three long weeks crossing this sector.Such was the region our Nautilus was visiting just then: a genuineprairie, a tightly woven carpet of algae, gulfweed, and bladder wrackso dense and compact a craft’s stempost couldn’t tear through itwithout difficulty. Accordingly, not wanting to entangle his propellerin this weed-choked mass, Captain Nemo stayed at a depth some metersbelow the surface of the waves.The name Sargasso comes from the Spanish word “sargazo,” meaninggulfweed. This gulfweed, the swimming gulfweed or berry carrier, isthe chief substance making up this immense shoal. And here’s why thesewater plants collect in this placid Atlantic basin, according to theexpert on the subject, Commander Maury, author of The PhysicalGeography of the Sea.The explanation he gives seems to entail a set of conditions thateverybody knows: “Now,” Maury says, “if bits of cork or chaff, or anyfloating substance, be put into a basin, and a circular motion begiven to the water, all the light substances will be found crowdingtogether near the center of the pool, where there is the leastmotion. Just such a basin is the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf Stream,and the Sargasso Sea is the center of the whirl.”I share Maury’s view, and I was able to study the phenomenon in thisexclusive setting where ships rarely go. Above us, huddled among thebrown weeds, there floated objects originating from all over: treetrunks ripped from the Rocky Mountains or the Andes and sent floatingdown the Amazon or the Mississippi, numerous pieces of wreckage,remnants of keels or undersides, bulwarks staved in and so weigheddown with seashells and barnacles, they couldn’t rise to the surfaceof the ocean. And the passing years will someday bear out Maury’sother view that by collecting in this way over the centuries, thesesubstances will be turned to stone by the action of the waters andwill then form inexhaustible coalfields. Valuable reserves prepared byfarseeing nature for that time when man will have exhausted his mineson the continents.In the midst of this hopelessly tangled fabric of weeds and fucusplants, I noted some delightful pink-colored, star-shaped alcyoncoral, sea anemone trailing the long tresses of their tentacles, somegreen, red, and blue jellyfish, and especially those big rhizostomejellyfish that Cuvier described, whose bluish parasols are trimmedwith violet festoons.We spent the whole day of February 22 in the Sargasso Sea, where fishthat dote on marine plants and crustaceans find plenty to eat. Thenext day the ocean resumed its usual appearance.From this moment on, for nineteen days from February 23 to March 12,the Nautilus stayed in the middle of the Atlantic, hustling us alongat a constant speed of 100 leagues every twenty-four hours. It wasobvious that Captain Nemo wanted to carry out his underwater program,and I had no doubt that he intended, after doubling Cape Horn, toreturn to the Pacific South Seas.So Ned Land had good reason to worry. In these wide seas empty ofislands, it was no longer feasible to jump ship. Nor did we have anyway to counter Captain Nemo’s whims. We had no choice but toacquiesce; but if we couldn’t attain our end through force or cunning,I liked to think we might achieve it through persuasion. Once thisvoyage was over, might not Captain Nemo consent to set us free inreturn for our promise never to reveal his existence? Our word ofhonor, which we sincerely would have kept. However, this delicatequestion would have to be negotiated with the captain. But how wouldhe receive our demands for freedom? At the very outset and in nouncertain terms, hadn’t he declared that the secret of his liferequired that we be permanently imprisoned on board the Nautilus?Wouldn’t he see my four-month silence as a tacit acceptance of thissituation? Would my returning to this subject arouse suspicions thatcould jeopardize our escape plans, if we had promising circumstancesfor trying again later on? I weighed all these considerations, turnedthem over in my mind, submitted them to Conseil, but he was as baffledas I was. In short, although I’m not easily discouraged, I realizedthat my chances of ever seeing my fellow men again were shrinking bythe day, especially at a time when Captain Nemo was recklessly racingtoward the south Atlantic!During those nineteen days just mentioned, no unique incidentsdistinguished our voyage. I saw little of the captain. He was atwork. In the library I often found books he had left open, especiallybooks on natural history. He had thumbed through my work on the greatocean depths, and the margins were covered with his notes, whichsometimes contradicted my theories and formulations. But the captainremained content with this method of refining my work, and he rarelydiscussed it with me. Sometimes I heard melancholy soundsreverberating from the organ, which he played very expressively, butonly at night in the midst of the most secretive darkness, while theNautilus slumbered in the wilderness of the ocean.During this part of our voyage, we navigated on the surface of thewaves for entire days. The sea was nearly deserted. A few sailingships, laden for the East Indies, were heading toward the Cape of GoodHope. One day we were chased by the longboats of a whaling vessel,which undoubtedly viewed us as some enormous baleen whale of greatvalue. But Captain Nemo didn’t want these gallant gentlemen wastingtheir time and energy, so he ended the hunt by diving beneath thewaters. This incident seemed to fascinate Ned Land intensely. I’m surethe Canadian was sorry that these fishermen couldn’t harpoon oursheet-iron cetacean and mortally wound it.During this period the fish Conseil and I observed differed littlefrom those we had already studied in other latitudes. Chief among themwere specimens of that dreadful cartilaginous genus that’s dividedinto three subgenera numbering at least thirty-two species: stripedsharks five meters long, the head squat and wider than the body, thecaudal fin curved, the back with seven big, black, parallel linesrunning lengthwise; then perlon sharks, ash gray, pierced with sevengill openings, furnished with a single dorsal fin placed almostexactly in the middle of the body.Some big dogfish also passed by, a voracious species of shark if thereever was one. With some justice, fishermen’s yarns aren’t to betrusted, but here’s what a few of them relate. Inside the corpse ofone of these animals there were found a buffalo head and a whole calf;in another, two tuna and a sailor in uniform; in yet another, asoldier with his saber; in another, finally, a horse with itsrider. In candor, none of these sounds like divinely inspiredtruth. But the fact remains that not a single dogfish let itself getcaught in the Nautilus’s nets, so I can’t vouch for their voracity.Schools of elegant, playful dolphin swam alongside for entiredays. They went in groups of five or six, hunting in packs like wolvesover the countryside; moreover, they’re just as voracious as dogfish,if I can believe a certain Copenhagen professor who says that from onedolphin’s stomach, he removed thirteen porpoises and fifteenseals. True, it was a killer whale, belonging to the biggest knownspecies, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-four feet. The familyDelphinia numbers ten genera, and the dolphins I saw were akin to thegenus Delphinorhynchus, remarkable for an extremely narrow muzzle fourtimes as long as the cranium. Measuring three meters, their bodieswere black on top, underneath a pinkish white strewn with small, veryscattered spots.From these seas I’ll also mention some unusual specimens of croakers,fish from the order Acanthopterygia, family Scienidea. Someauthors—more artistic than scientific—claim that these fish aremelodious singers, that their voices in unison put on concertsunmatched by human choristers. I don’t say nay, but to my regret thesecroakers didn’t serenade us as we passed.Finally, to conclude, Conseil classified a large number of flyingfish. Nothing could have made a more unusual sight than the marveloustiming with which dolphins hunt these fish. Whatever the range of itsflight, however evasive its trajectory (even up and over theNautilus), the hapless flying fish always found a dolphin to welcomeit with open mouth. These were either flying gurnards or kitelike searobins, whose lips glowed in the dark, at night scrawling fierystreaks in the air before plunging into the murky waters like so manyshooting stars.Our navigating continued under these conditions until March 13. Thatday the Nautilus was put to work in some depth-sounding experimentsthat fascinated me deeply.By then we had fared nearly 13,000 leagues from our starting point inthe Pacific high seas. Our position fix placed us in latitude 45degrees 37’ south and longitude 37 degrees 53’ west. These were thesame waterways where Captain Denham, aboard the Herald, payed out14,000 meters of sounding line without finding bottom. It was here toothat Lieutenant Parker, aboard the American frigate Congress, wasunable to reach the underwater soil at 15,149 meters.Captain Nemo decided to take his Nautilus down to the lowest depths inorder to double-check these different soundings. I got ready to recordthe results of this experiment. The panels in the lounge opened, andmaneuvers began for reaching those strata so prodigiously far removed.It was apparently considered out of the question to dive by fillingthe ballast tanks. Perhaps they wouldn’t sufficiently increase theNautilus’s specific gravity. Moreover, in order to come back up, itwould be necessary to expel the excess water, and our pumps might nothave been strong enough to overcome the outside pressure.Captain Nemo decided to make for the ocean floor by submerging on anappropriately gradual diagonal with the help of his side fins, whichwere set at a 45 degrees angle to the Nautilus’s waterline. Then thepropeller was brought to its maximum speed, and its four bladeschurned the waves with indescribable violence.Under this powerful thrust the Nautilus’s hull quivered like aresonating chord, and the ship sank steadily under thewaters. Stationed in the lounge, the captain and I watched the needleswerving swiftly over the pressure gauge. Soon we had gone below thelivable zone where most fish reside. Some of these animals can thriveonly at the surface of seas or rivers, but a minority can dwell atfairly great depths. Among the latter I observed a species of dogfishcalled the cow shark that’s equipped with six respiratory slits, thetelescope fish with its enormous eyes, the armored gurnard with graythoracic fins plus black pectoral fins and a breastplate protected bypale red slabs of bone, then finally the grenadier, living at a depthof 1,200 meters, by that point tolerating a pressure of 120atmospheres.I asked Captain Nemo if he had observed any fish at more considerabledepths.“Fish? Rarely!” he answered me. “But given the current state of marinescience, who are we to presume, what do we really know of thesedepths?”“Just this, captain. In going toward the ocean’s lower strata, we knowthat vegetable life disappears more quickly than animal life. We knowthat moving creatures can still be encountered where water plants nolonger grow. We know that oysters and pilgrim scallops live in 2,000meters of water, and that Admiral McClintock, England’s hero of thepolar seas, pulled in a live sea star from a depth of 2,500 meters. Weknow that the crew of the Royal Navy’s Bulldog fished up a starfishfrom 2,620 fathoms, hence from a depth of more than one verticalleague. Would you still say, Captain Nemo, that we really knownothing?”“No, professor,” the captain replied, “I wouldn’t be sodiscourteous. Yet I’ll ask you to explain how these creatures can liveat such depths?”“I explain it on two grounds,” I replied. “In the first place, becausevertical currents, which are caused by differences in the water’ssalinity and density, can produce enough motion to sustain therudimentary lifestyles of sea lilies and starfish.”“True,” the captain put in.“In the second place, because oxygen is the basis of life, and we knowthat the amount of oxygen dissolved in salt water increases ratherthan decreases with depth, that the pressure in these lower stratahelps to concentrate their oxygen content.”“Oho! We know that, do we?” Captain Nemo replied in a tone of mildsurprise. “Well, professor, we have good reason to know it becauseit’s the truth. I might add, in fact, that the air bladders of fishcontain more nitrogen than oxygen when these animals are caught at thesurface of the water, and conversely, more oxygen than nitrogen whenthey’re pulled up from the lower depths. Which bears out yourformulation. But let’s continue our observations.”My eyes flew back to the pressure gauge. The instrument indicated adepth of 6,000 meters. Our submergence had been going on for anhour. The Nautilus slid downward on its slanting fins, stillsinking. These deserted waters were wonderfully clear, with atransparency impossible to convey. An hour later we were at 13,000meters—about three and a quarter vertical leagues—and the ocean floorwas nowhere in sight.However, at 14,000 meters I saw blackish peaks rising in the midst ofthe waters. But these summits could have belonged to mountains as highor even higher than the Himalayas or Mt. Blanc, and the extent ofthese depths remained incalculable.Despite the powerful pressures it was undergoing, the Nautilus sankstill deeper. I could feel its sheet-iron plates trembling down totheir riveted joins; metal bars arched; bulkheads groaned; the loungewindows seemed to be warping inward under the water’s pressure. Andthis whole sturdy mechanism would surely have given way, if, as itscaptain had said, it weren’t capable of resisting like a solid block.While grazing these rocky slopes lost under the waters, I stillspotted some seashells, tube worms, lively annelid worms from thegenus Spirorbis, and certain starfish specimens.But soon these last representatives of animal life vanished, and threevertical leagues down, the Nautilus passed below the limits ofunderwater existence just as an air balloon rises above the breathablezones in the sky. We reached a depth of 16,000 meters—four verticalleagues—and by then the Nautilus’s plating was tolerating a pressureof 1,600 atmospheres, in other words, 1,600 kilograms per each squarecentimeter on its surface!“What an experience!” I exclaimed. “Traveling these deep regions whereno man has ever ventured before! Look, captain! Look at thesemagnificent rocks, these uninhabited caves, these last global hauntswhere life is no longer possible! What unheard-of scenery, and why arewe reduced to preserving it only as a memory?”“Would you like,” Captain Nemo asked me, “to bring back more than justa memory?”“What do you mean?”“I mean that nothing could be easier than taking a photograph of thisunderwater region!”Before I had time to express the surprise this new proposition causedme, a camera was carried into the lounge at Captain Nemo’srequest. The liquid setting, electrically lit, unfolded with perfectclarity through the wide-open panels. No shadows, no blurs, thanks toour artificial light. Not even sunshine could have been better for ourpurposes. With the thrust of its propeller curbed by the slant of itsfins, the Nautilus stood still. The camera was aimed at the scenery onthe ocean floor, and in a few seconds we had a perfect negative.I attach a print of the positive. In it you can view these primordialrocks that have never seen the light of day, this nether granite thatforms the powerful foundation of our globe, the deep caves cut intothe stony mass, the outlines of incomparable distinctness whose faredges stand out in black as if from the brush of certain Flemishpainters. In the distance is a mountainous horizon, a wondrouslyundulating line that makes up the background of this landscape. Thegeneral effect of these smooth rocks is indescribable: black,polished, without moss or other blemish, carved into strange shapes,sitting firmly on a carpet of sand that sparkled beneath our streamsof electric light.Meanwhile, his photographic operations over, Captain Nemo told me:“Let’s go back up, professor. We mustn’t push our luck and expose theNautilus too long to these pressures.”“Let’s go back up!” I replied.“Hold on tight.”Before I had time to realize why the captain made this recommendation,I was hurled to the carpet.Its fins set vertically, its propeller thrown in gear at the captain’ssignal, the Nautilus rose with lightning speed, shooting upward likean air balloon into the sky. Vibrating resonantly, it knifed throughthe watery mass. Not a single detail was visible. In four minutes ithad cleared the four vertical leagues separating it from the surfaceof the ocean, and after emerging like a flying fish, it fell back intothe sea, making the waves leap to prodigious heights.CHAPTER 12Sperm Whales and Baleen WhalesDURING THE NIGHT of March 13-14, the Nautilus resumed its southwardheading. Once it was abreast of Cape Horn, I thought it would strikewest of the cape, make for Pacific seas, and complete its tour of theworld. It did nothing of the sort and kept moving toward thesouthernmost regions. So where was it bound? The pole? That wasinsanity. I was beginning to think that the captain’s recklessnessmore than justified Ned Land’s worst fears.For a good while the Canadian had said nothing more to me about hisescape plans. He had become less sociable, almost sullen. I could seehow heavily this protracted imprisonment was weighing on him. I couldfeel the anger building in him. Whenever he encountered the captain,his eyes would flicker with dark fire, and I was in constant dreadthat his natural vehemence would cause him to do something rash.That day, March 14, he and Conseil managed to find me in mystateroom. I asked them the purpose of their visit.“To put a simple question to you, sir,” the Canadian answered me.“Go on, Ned.”“How many men do you think are on board the Nautilus?”“I’m unable to say, my friend.”“It seems to me,” Ned Land went on, “that it wouldn’t take much of acrew to run a ship like this one.”“Correct,” I replied. “Under existing conditions some ten men at themost should be enough to operate it.”“All right,” the Canadian said, “then why should there be any morethan that?”“Why?” I answered.I stared at Ned Land, whose motives were easy to guess.“Because,” I said, “if I can trust my hunches, if I truly understandthe captain’s way of life, his Nautilus isn’t simply a ship. It’smeant to be a refuge for people like its commander, people who havesevered all ties with the shore.”“Perhaps,” Conseil said, “but in a nutshell, the Nautilus can holdonly a certain number of men, so couldn’t master estimate theirmaximum?”“How, Conseil?”“By calculating it. Master is familiar with the ship’s capacity, hencethe amount of air it contains; on the other hand, master knows howmuch air each man consumes in the act of breathing, and he can comparethis data with the fact that the Nautilus must rise to the surfaceevery twenty-four hours . . .”Conseil didn’t finish his sentence, but I could easily see what he wasdriving at.“I follow you,” I said. “But while they’re simple to do, suchcalculations can give only a very uncertain figure.”“No problem,” the Canadian went on insistently.“Then here’s how to calculate it,” I replied. “In one hour each manconsumes the oxygen contained in 100 liters of air, hence duringtwenty-four hours the oxygen contained in 2,400 liters. Therefore, wemust look for the multiple of 2,400 liters of air that gives us theamount found in the Nautilus.”“Precisely,” Conseil said.“Now then,” I went on, “the Nautilus’s capacity is 1,500 metric tons,and that of a ton is 1,000 liters, so the Nautilus holds 1,500,000liters of air, which, divided by 2,400 . . .”I did a quick pencil calculation.“. . . gives us the quotient of 625. Which is tantamount to sayingthat the air contained in the Nautilus would be exactly enough for 625men over twenty-four hours.”“625!” Ned repeated.“But rest assured,” I added, “that between passengers, seamen, orofficers, we don’t total one-tenth of that figure.”“Which is still too many for three men!” Conseil muttered.“So, my poor Ned, I can only counsel patience.”“And,” Conseil replied, “even more than patience, resignation.”Conseil had said the true word.“Even so,” he went on, “Captain Nemo can’t go south forever! He’llsurely have to stop, if only at the Ice Bank, and he’ll return to theseas of civilization! Then it will be time to resume Ned Land’splans.”The Canadian shook his head, passed his hand over his brow, made noreply, and left us.“With master’s permission, I’ll make an observation to him,” Conseilthen told me. “Our poor Ned broods about all the things he can’thave. He’s haunted by his former life. He seems to miss everythingthat’s denied us. He’s obsessed by his old memories and it’s breakinghis heart. We must understand him. What does he have to occupy himhere? Nothing. He isn’t a scientist like master, and he doesn’t shareour enthusiasm for the sea’s wonders. He would risk anything just toenter a tavern in his own country!”To be sure, the monotony of life on board must have seemed unbearableto the Canadian, who was accustomed to freedom and activity. It was arare event that could excite him. That day, however, a developmentoccurred that reminded him of his happy years as a harpooner.Near eleven o’clock in the morning, while on the surface of the ocean,the Nautilus fell in with a herd of baleen whales. This encounterdidn’t surprise me, because I knew these animals were being hunted sorelentlessly that they took refuge in the ocean basins of the highlatitudes.In the maritime world and in the realm of geographic exploration,whales have played a major role. This is the animal that first draggedthe Basques in its wake, then Asturian Spaniards, Englishmen, andDutchmen, emboldening them against the ocean’s perils, and leadingthem to the ends of the earth. Baleen whales like to frequent thesouthernmost and northernmost seas. Old legends even claim that thesecetaceans led fishermen to within a mere seven leagues of the NorthPole. Although this feat is fictitious, it will someday come true,because it’s likely that by hunting whales in the Arctic or Antarcticregions, man will finally reach this unknown spot on the globe.We were seated on the platform next to a tranquil sea. The month ofMarch, since it’s the equivalent of October in these latitudes, wasgiving us some fine autumn days. It was the Canadian—on this topic hewas never mistaken—who sighted a baleen whale on the easternhorizon. If you looked carefully, you could see its blackish backalternately rise and fall above the waves, five miles from theNautilus.“Wow!” Ned Land exclaimed. “If I were on board a whaler, there’s anencounter that would be great fun! That’s one big animal! Look howhigh its blowholes are spouting all that air and steam! Damnation! Whyam I chained to this hunk of sheet iron!”“Why, Ned!” I replied. “You still aren’t over your old fishing urges?”“How could a whale fisherman forget his old trade, sir? Who could everget tired of such exciting hunting?”“You’ve never fished these seas, Ned?”“Never, sir. Just the northernmost seas, equally in the Bering Straitand the Davis Strait.”“So the southern right whale is still unknown to you. Until now it’sthe bowhead whale you’ve hunted, and it won’t risk going past the warmwaters of the equator.”“Oh, professor, what are you feeding me?” the Canadian answered in atolerably skeptical tone.“I’m feeding you the facts.”“By thunder! In ’65, just two and a half years ago, I to whom youspeak, I myself stepped onto the carcass of a whale near Greenland,and its flank still carried the marked harpoon of a whaling ship fromthe Bering Sea. Now I ask you, after it had been wounded west ofAmerica, how could this animal be killed in the east, unless it hadcleared the equator and doubled Cape Horn or the Cape of Good Hope?”“I agree with our friend Ned,” Conseil said, “and I’m waiting to hearhow master will reply to him.”“Master will reply, my friends, that baleen whales are localized,according to species, within certain seas that they never leave. Andif one of these animals went from the Bering Strait to the DavisStrait, it’s quite simply because there’s some passageway from the onesea to the other, either along the coasts of Canada or Siberia.”“You expect us to fall for that?” the Canadian asked, tipping me awink.“If master says so,” Conseil replied.“Which means,” the Canadian went on, “since I’ve never fished thesewaterways, I don’t know the whales that frequent them?”“That’s what I’ve been telling you, Ned.”“All the more reason to get to know them,” Conseil answered.“Look! Look!” the Canadian exclaimed, his voice full ofexcitement. “It’s approaching! It’s coming toward us! It’s thumbingits nose at me! It knows I can’t do a blessed thing to it!”Ned stamped his foot. Brandishing an imaginary harpoon, his handspositively trembled.“These cetaceans,” he asked, “are they as big as the ones in thenorthernmost seas?”“Pretty nearly, Ned.”“Because I’ve seen big baleen whales, sir, whales measuring up to 100feet long! I’ve even heard that those rorqual whales off the AleutianIslands sometimes get over 150 feet.”“That strikes me as exaggerated,” I replied. “Those animals are onlymembers of the genus Balaenoptera furnished with dorsal fins, and likesperm whales, they’re generally smaller than the bowhead whale.”“Oh!” exclaimed the Canadian, whose eyes hadn’t left the ocean. “It’sgetting closer, it’s coming into the Nautilus’s waters!”Then, going on with his conversation:“You talk about sperm whales,” he said, “as if they were littlebeasts! But there are stories of gigantic sperm whales. They’re shrewdcetaceans. I hear that some will cover themselves with algae and fucusplants. People mistake them for islets. They pitch camp on top, makethemselves at home, light a fire—”“Build houses,” Conseil said.“Yes, funny man,” Ned Land replied. “Then one fine day the animaldives and drags all its occupants down into the depths.”“Like in the voyages of Sinbad the Sailor,” I answered, laughing. “Oh,Mr. Land, you’re addicted to tall tales! What sperm whales you’rehanding us! I hope you don’t really believe in them!”“Mr. Naturalist,” the Canadian replied in all seriousness, “when itcomes to whales, you can believe anything! (Look at that one move!Look at it stealing away!) People claim these animals can circlearound the world in just fifteen days.”“I don’t say nay.”“But what you undoubtedly don’t know, Professor Aronnax, is that atthe beginning of the world, whales traveled even quicker.”“Oh really, Ned! And why so?”“Because in those days their tails moved side to side, like those onfish, in other words, their tails were straight up, thrashing thewater from left to right, right to left. But spotting that they swamtoo fast, our Creator twisted their tails, and ever since they’ve beenthrashing the waves up and down, at the expense of their speed.”“Fine, Ned,” I said, then resurrected one of the Canadian’sexpressions. “You expect us to fall for that?”“Not too terribly,” Ned Land replied, “and no more than if I told youthere are whales that are 300 feet long and weigh 1,000,000 pounds.”“That’s indeed considerable,” I said. “But you must admit that certaincetaceans do grow to significant size, since they’re said to supply asmuch as 120 metric tons of oil.”“That I’ve seen,” the Canadian said.“I can easily believe it, Ned, just as I can believe that certainbaleen whales equal 100 elephants in bulk. Imagine the impact of sucha mass if it were launched at full speed!”“Is it true,” Conseil asked, “that they can sink ships?”“Ships? I doubt it,” I replied. “However, they say that in 1820, rightin these southern seas, a baleen whale rushed at the Essex and pushedit backward at a speed of four meters per second. Its stern wasflooded, and the Essex went down fast.”Ned looked at me with a bantering expression.“Speaking for myself,” he said, “I once got walloped by a whale’stail—in my longboat, needless to say. My companions and I werelaunched to an altitude of six meters. But next to the professor’swhale, mine was just a baby.”“Do these animals live a long time?” Conseil asked.“A thousand years,” the Canadian replied without hesitation.“And how, Ned,” I asked, “do you know that’s so?”“Because people say so.”“And why do people say so?”“Because people know so.”“No, Ned! People don’t know so, they suppose so, and here’s the logicwith which they back up their beliefs. When fishermen first huntedwhales 400 years ago, these animals grew to bigger sizes than they dotoday. Reasonably enough, it’s assumed that today’s whales are smallerbecause they haven’t had time to reach their full growth. That’s whythe Count de Buffon’s encyclopedia says that cetaceans can live, andeven must live, for a thousand years. You understand?”Ned Land didn’t understand. He no longer even heard me. That baleenwhale kept coming closer. His eyes devoured it.“Oh!” he exclaimed. “It’s not just one whale, it’s ten, twenty, awhole gam! And I can’t do a thing! I’m tied hand and foot!”“But Ned my friend,” Conseil said, “why not ask Captain Nemo forpermission to hunt—”Before Conseil could finish his sentence, Ned Land scooted down thehatch and ran to look for the captain. A few moments later, the two ofthem reappeared on the platform.Captain Nemo observed the herd of cetaceans cavorting on the waters amile from the Nautilus.“They’re southern right whales,” he said. “There goes the fortune of awhole whaling fleet.”“Well, sir,” the Canadian asked, “couldn’t I hunt them, just so Idon’t forget my old harpooning trade?”“Hunt them? What for?” Captain Nemo replied. “Simply to destroy them?We have no use for whale oil on this ship.”“But, sir,” the Canadian went on, “in the Red Sea you authorized us tochase a dugong!”“There it was an issue of obtaining fresh meat for my crew. Here itwould be killing for the sake of killing. I’m well aware that’s aprivilege reserved for mankind, but I don’t allow such murderouspastimes. When your peers, Mr. Land, destroy decent, harmlesscreatures like the southern right whale or the bowhead whale, theycommit a reprehensible offense. Thus they’ve already depopulated allof Baffin Bay, and they’ll wipe out a whole class of usefulanimals. So leave these poor cetaceans alone. They have quite enoughnatural enemies, such as sperm whales, swordfish, and sawfish, withoutyou meddling with them.”I’ll let the reader decide what faces the Canadian made during thislecture on hunting ethics. Furnishing such arguments to a professionalharpooner was a waste of words. Ned Land stared at Captain Nemo andobviously missed his meaning. But the captain was right. Thanks to themindless, barbaric bloodthirstiness of fishermen, the last baleenwhale will someday disappear from the ocean.Ned Land whistled “Yankee Doodle” between his teeth, stuffed his handsin his pockets, and turned his back on us.Meanwhile Captain Nemo studied the herd of cetaceans, then addressedme:“I was right to claim that baleen whales have enough natural enemieswithout counting man. These specimens will soon have to deal withmighty opponents. Eight miles to leeward, Professor Aronnax, can yousee those blackish specks moving about?”“Yes, captain,” I replied.“Those are sperm whales, dreadful animals that I’ve sometimesencountered in herds of 200 or 300! As for them, they’re cruel,destructive beasts, and they deserve to be exterminated.”The Canadian turned swiftly at these last words.“Well, captain,” I said, “on behalf of the baleen whales, there’sstill time—”“It’s pointless to run any risks, professor. The Nautilus will sufficeto disperse these sperm whales. It’s armed with a steel spur quiteequal to Mr. Land’s harpoon, I imagine.”The Canadian didn’t even bother shrugging his shoulders. Attackingcetaceans with thrusts from a spur! Who ever heard of such malarkey!“Wait and see, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo said. “We’ll show youa style of hunting with which you aren’t yet familiar. We’ll take nopity on these ferocious cetaceans. They’re merely mouth and teeth!”Mouth and teeth! There’s no better way to describe the long-skulledsperm whale, whose length sometimes exceeds twenty-five meters. Theenormous head of this cetacean occupies about a third of itsbody. Better armed than a baleen whale, whose upper jaw is adornedsolely with whalebone, the sperm whale is equipped with twenty-fivehuge teeth that are twenty centimeters high, have cylindrical, conicalsummits, and weigh two pounds each. In the top part of this enormoushead, inside big cavities separated by cartilage, you’ll find 300 to400 kilograms of that valuable oil called “spermaceti.” The spermwhale is an awkward animal, more tadpole than fish, as ProfessorFrédol has noted. It’s poorly constructed, being “defective,” so tospeak, over the whole left side of its frame, with good eyesight onlyin its right eye.Meanwhile that monstrous herd kept coming closer. It had seen thebaleen whales and was preparing to attack. You could tell in advancethat the sperm whales would be victorious, not only because they werebetter built for fighting than their harmless adversaries, but alsobecause they could stay longer underwater before returning to breatheat the surface.There was just time to run to the rescue of the baleen whales. TheNautilus proceeded to midwater. Conseil, Ned, and I sat in front ofthe lounge windows. Captain Nemo made his way to the helmsman’s sideto operate his submersible as an engine of destruction. Soon I feltthe beats of our propeller getting faster, and we picked up speed.The battle between sperm whales and baleen whales had already begunwhen the Nautilus arrived. It maneuvered to cut into the herd oflong-skulled predators. At first the latter showed little concern atthe sight of this new monster meddling in the battle. But they soonhad to sidestep its thrusts.What a struggle! Ned Land quickly grew enthusiastic and even ended upapplauding. Brandished in its captain’s hands, the Nautilus was simplya fearsome harpoon. He hurled it at those fleshy masses and ran themclean through, leaving behind two squirming animal halves. As forthose daunting strokes of the tail hitting our sides, the ship neverfelt them. No more than the collisions it caused. One sperm whaleexterminated, it ran at another, tacked on the spot so as not to missits prey, went ahead or astern, obeyed its rudder, dived when thecetacean sank to deeper strata, rose with it when it returned to thesurface, struck it head-on or slantwise, hacked at it or tore it, andfrom every direction and at any speed, skewered it with its dreadfulspur.What bloodshed! What a hubbub on the surface of the waves! What sharphisses and snorts unique to these frightened animals! Their tailschurned the normally peaceful strata into actual billows.This Homeric slaughter dragged on for an hour, and the long-skulledpredators couldn’t get away. Several times ten or twelve of themteamed up, trying to crush the Nautilus with their sheer mass. Throughthe windows you could see their enormous mouths paved with teeth,their fearsome eyes. Losing all self-control, Ned Land hurled threatsand insults at them. You could feel them clinging to the submersiblelike hounds atop a wild boar in the underbrush. But by forcing thepace of its propeller, the Nautilus carried them off, dragged themunder, or brought them back to the upper level of the waters,untroubled by their enormous weight or their powerful grip.Finally this mass of sperm whales thinned out. The waves grew tranquilagain. I felt us rising to the surface of the ocean. The hatch openedand we rushed onto the platform.The sea was covered with mutilated corpses. A fearsome explosioncouldn’t have slashed, torn, or shredded these fleshy masses withgreater violence. We were floating in the midst of gigantic bodies,bluish on the back, whitish on the belly, and all deformed by enormousprotuberances. A few frightened sperm whales were fleeing toward thehorizon. The waves were dyed red over an area of several miles, andthe Nautilus was floating in the middle of a sea of blood.Captain Nemo rejoined us.“Well, Mr. Land?” he said.“Well, sir,” replied the Canadian, whose enthusiasm had subsided,“it’s a dreadful sight for sure. But I’m a hunter not a butcher, andthis is plain butchery.”“It was a slaughter of destructive animals,” the captain replied, “andthe Nautilus is no butcher knife.”“I prefer my harpoon,” the Canadian answered.“To each his own,” the captain replied, staring intently at Ned Land.I was in dread the latter would give way to some violent outburst thatmight have had deplorable consequences. But his anger was diverted bythe sight of a baleen whale that the Nautilus had pulled alongside ofjust then.This animal had been unable to escape the teeth of those spermwhales. I recognized the southern right whale, its head squat, itsbody dark all over. Anatomically, it’s distinguished from the whitewhale and the black right whale by the fusion of its seven cervicalvertebrae, and it numbers two more ribs than its relatives. Floatingon its side, its belly riddled with bites, the poor cetacean wasdead. Still hanging from the tip of its mutilated fin was a littlebaby whale that it had been unable to rescue from the slaughter. Itsopen mouth let water flow through its whalebone like a murmuring surf.Captain Nemo guided the Nautilus next to the animal’s corpse. Two ofhis men climbed onto the whale’s flank, and to my astonishment, I sawthem draw from its udders all the milk they held, in other words,enough to fill two or three casks.The captain offered me a cup of this still-warm milk. I couldn’t helpshowing my distaste for such a beverage. He assured me that this milkwas excellent, no different from cow’s milk.I sampled it and agreed. So this milk was a worthwhile reserve rationfor us, because in the form of salt butter or cheese, it would providea pleasant change of pace from our standard fare.From that day on, I noted with some uneasiness that Ned Land’sattitudes toward Captain Nemo grew worse and worse, and I decided tokeep a close watch on the Canadian’s movements and activities.CHAPTER 13The Ice BankTHE NAUTILUS resumed its unruffled southbound heading. It went alongthe 50th meridian with considerable speed. Would it go to the pole? Ididn’t think so, because every previous attempt to reach this spot onthe globe had failed. Besides, the season was already quite advanced,since March 13 on Antarctic shores corresponds with September 13 inthe northernmost regions, which marks the beginning of the equinoctialperiod.On March 14 at latitude 55 degrees, I spotted floating ice, plain palebits of rubble twenty to twenty-five feet long, which formed reefsover which the sea burst into foam. The Nautilus stayed on the surfaceof the ocean. Having fished in the Arctic seas, Ned Land was alreadyfamiliar with the sight of icebergs. Conseil and I were marveling atthem for the first time.In the sky toward the southern horizon, there stretched a dazzlingwhite band. English whalers have given this the name “ice blink.” Nomatter how heavy the clouds may be, they can’t obscure thisphenomenon. It announces the presence of a pack, or shoal, of ice.Indeed, larger blocks of ice soon appeared, their brilliance varyingat the whim of the mists. Some of these masses displayed green veins,as if scrawled with undulating lines of copper sulfate. Others lookedlike enormous amethysts, letting the light penetrate theirinsides. The latter reflected the sun’s rays from the thousand facetsof their crystals. The former, tinted with a bright limestone sheen,would have supplied enough building material to make a whole marbletown.The farther down south we went, the more these floating islands grewin numbers and prominence. Polar birds nested on them by thethousands. These were petrels, cape pigeons, or puffins, and theircalls were deafening. Mistaking the Nautilus for the corpse of awhale, some of them alighted on it and prodded its resonant sheet ironwith pecks of their beaks.During this navigating in the midst of the ice, Captain Nemo oftenstayed on the platform. He observed these deserted waterwayscarefully. I saw his calm eyes sometimes perk up. In these polar seasforbidden to man, did he feel right at home, the lord of theseunreachable regions? Perhaps. But he didn’t say. He stood still,reviving only when his pilot’s instincts took over. Then, steering hisNautilus with consummate dexterity, he skillfully dodged the masses ofice, some of which measured several miles in length, their heightsvarying from seventy to eighty meters. Often the horizon seemedcompletely closed off. Abreast of latitude 60 degrees, everypassageway had disappeared. Searching with care, Captain Nemo soonfound a narrow opening into which he brazenly slipped, well aware,however, that it would close behind him.Guided by his skillful hands, the Nautilus passed by all thesedifferent masses of ice, which are classified by size and shape with aprecision that enraptured Conseil: “icebergs,” or mountains; “icefields,” or smooth, limitless tracts; “drift ice,” or floating floes;“packs,” or broken tracts, called “patches” when they’re circular and“streams” when they form long strips.The temperature was fairly low. Exposed to the outside air, thethermometer marked -2 degrees to-3 degrees centigrade. But we were warmly dressed in furs, for whichseals and aquatic bears had paid the price. Evenly heated by all itselectric equipment, the Nautilus’s interior defied the most intensecold. Moreover, to find a bearable temperature, the ship had only tosink just a few meters beneath the waves.Two months earlier we would have enjoyed perpetual daylight in thislatitude; but night already fell for three or four hours, and later itwould cast six months of shadow over these circumpolar regions.On March 15 we passed beyond the latitude of the South Shetland andSouth Orkney Islands. The captain told me that many tribes of sealsused to inhabit these shores; but English and American whalers, in afrenzy of destruction, slaughtered all the adults, including pregnantfemales, and where life and activity once existed, those fishermenleft behind only silence and death.Going along the 55th meridian, the Nautilus cut the Antarctic Circleon March 16 near eight o’clock in the morning. Ice completelysurrounded us and closed off the horizon. Nevertheless, Captain Nemowent from passageway to passageway, always proceeding south.“But where’s he going?” I asked.“Straight ahead,” Conseil replied. “Ultimately, when he can’t go anyfarther, he’ll stop.”“I wouldn’t bet on it!” I replied.And in all honesty, I confess that this venturesome excursion was farfrom displeasing to me. I can’t express the intensity of my amazementat the beauties of these new regions. The ice struck superbposes. Here, its general effect suggested an oriental town withcountless minarets and mosques. There, a city in ruins, flung to theground by convulsions in the earth. These views were variedcontinuously by the sun’s oblique rays, or were completely swallowedup by gray mists in the middle of blizzards. Then explosions,cave-ins, and great iceberg somersaults would occur all around us,altering the scenery like the changing landscape in a diorama.If the Nautilus was submerged during these losses of balance, we heardthe resulting noises spread under the waters with frightful intensity,and the collapse of these masses created daunting eddies down to theocean’s lower strata. The Nautilus then rolled and pitched like a shipleft to the fury of the elements.Often, no longer seeing any way out, I thought we were imprisoned forgood, but Captain Nemo, guided by his instincts, discovered newpassageways from the tiniest indications. He was never wrong when heobserved slender threads of bluish water streaking through these icefields. Accordingly, I was sure that he had already risked hisNautilus in the midst of the Antarctic seas.However, during the day of March 16, these tracts of ice completelybarred our path. It wasn’t the Ice Bank as yet, just huge ice fieldscemented together by the cold. This obstacle couldn’t stop CaptainNemo, and he launched his ship against the ice fields with hideousviolence. The Nautilus went into these brittle masses like a wedge,splitting them with dreadful cracklings. It was an old-fashionedbattering ram propelled with infinite power. Hurled aloft, ice rubblefell back around us like hail. Through brute force alone, thesubmersible carved out a channel for itself. Carried away by itsmomentum, the ship sometimes mounted on top of these tracts of ice andcrushed them with its weight, or at other times, when cooped upbeneath the ice fields, it split them with simple pitching movements,creating wide punctures.Violent squalls assaulted us during the daytime. Thanks to certainheavy mists, we couldn’t see from one end of the platform to theother. The wind shifted abruptly to every point on the compass. Thesnow was piling up in such packed layers, it had to be chipped loosewith blows from picks. Even in a temperature of merely -5 degreescentigrade, every outside part of the Nautilus was covered with ice. Aship’s rigging would have been unusable, because all its tackle wouldhave jammed in the grooves of the pulleys. Only a craft without sails,driven by an electric motor that needed no coal, could face such highlatitudes.Under these conditions the barometer generally stayed quite low. Itfell as far as 73.5 centimeters. Our compass indications no longeroffered any guarantees. The deranged needles would mark contradictorydirections as we approached the southern magnetic pole, which doesn’tcoincide with the South Pole proper. In fact, according to theastronomer Hansteen, this magnetic pole is located fairly close tolatitude 70 degrees and longitude 130 degrees, or abiding by theobservations of Louis-Isidore Duperrey, in longitude 135 degrees andlatitude 70 degrees 30’. Hence we had to transport compasses todifferent parts of the ship, take many readings, and strike anaverage. Often we could chart our course only by guesswork, a lessthan satisfactory method in the midst of these winding passagewayswhose landmarks change continuously.At last on March 18, after twenty futile assaults, the Nautilus wasdecisively held in check. No longer was it an ice stream, patch, orfield—it was an endless, immovable barrier formed by ice mountainsfused to each other.“The Ice Bank!” the Canadian told me.For Ned Land, as well as for every navigator before us, I knew thatthis was the great insurmountable obstacle. When the sun appeared foran instant near noon, Captain Nemo took a reasonably accurate sightthat gave our position as longitude 51 degrees 30’ and latitude 67degrees 39’ south. This was a position already well along in theseAntarctic regions.As for the liquid surface of the sea, there was no longer anysemblance of it before our eyes. Before the Nautilus’s spur there layvast broken plains, a tangle of confused chunks with all thehelter-skelter unpredictability typical of a river’s surface a shortwhile before its ice breakup; but in this case the proportions weregigantic. Here and there stood sharp peaks, lean spires that rose ashigh as 200 feet; farther off, a succession of steeply cut cliffssporting a grayish tint, huge mirrors that reflected the sparse raysof a sun half drowned in mist. Beyond, a stark silence reigned in thisdesolate natural setting, a silence barely broken by the flappingwings of petrels or puffins. By this point everything was frozen, evensound.So the Nautilus had to halt in its venturesome course among thesetracts of ice.“Sir,” Ned Land told me that day, “if your captain goes any farther. . .”“Yes?”“He’ll be a superman.”“How so, Ned?”“Because nobody can clear the Ice Bank. Your captain’s a powerful man,but damnation, he isn’t more powerful than nature. If she draws aboundary line, there you stop, like it or not!”“Correct, Ned Land, but I still want to know what’s behind this IceBank! Behold my greatest source of irritation—a wall!”“Master is right,” Conseil said. “Walls were invented simply tofrustrate scientists. All walls should be banned.”“Fine!” the Canadian put in. “But we already know what’s behind thisIce Bank.”“What?” I asked.“Ice, ice, and more ice.”“You may be sure of that, Ned,” I answered, “but I’m not. That’s why Iwant to see for myself.”“Well, professor,” the Canadian replied, “you can just drop that idea!You’ve made it to the Ice Bank, which is already far enough, but youwon’t get any farther, neither your Captain Nemo or his Nautilus. Andwhether he wants to or not, we’ll head north again, in other words, tothe land of sensible people.”I had to agree that Ned Land was right, and until ships are built tonavigate over tracts of ice, they’ll have to stop at the Ice Bank.Indeed, despite its efforts, despite the powerful methods it used tosplit this ice, the Nautilus was reduced to immobility. Ordinarily,when someone can’t go any farther, he still has the option ofreturning in his tracks. But here it was just as impossible to turnback as to go forward, because every passageway had closed behind us,and if our submersible remained even slightly stationary, it would befrozen in without delay. Which is exactly what happened near twoo’clock in the afternoon, and fresh ice kept forming over the ship’ssides with astonishing speed. I had to admit that Captain Nemo’sleadership had been most injudicious.Just then I was on the platform. Observing the situation for somewhile, the captain said to me:“Well, professor! What think you?”“I think we’re trapped, captain.”“Trapped! What do you mean?”“I mean we can’t go forward, backward, or sideways. I think that’s thestandard definition of ‘trapped,’ at least in the civilized world.”“So, Professor Aronnax, you think the Nautilus won’t be able to floatclear?”“Only with the greatest difficulty, captain, since the season isalready too advanced for you to depend on an ice breakup.”“Oh, professor,” Captain Nemo replied in an ironic tone, “you neverchange! You see only impediments and obstacles! I promise you, notonly will the Nautilus float clear, it will go farther still!”“Farther south?” I asked, gaping at the captain.“Yes, sir, it will go to the pole.”“To the pole!” I exclaimed, unable to keep back a movement ofdisbelief.“Yes,” the captain replied coolly, “the Antarctic pole, that unknownspot crossed by every meridian on the globe. As you know, I dowhatever I like with my Nautilus.”Yes, I did know that! I knew this man was daring to the point of beingfoolhardy. But to overcome all the obstacles around the SouthPole—even more unattainable than the North Pole, which still hadn’tbeen reached by the boldest navigators—wasn’t this an absolutelyinsane undertaking, one that could occur only in the brain of amadman?It then dawned on me to ask Captain Nemo if he had already discoveredthis pole, which no human being had ever trod underfoot.“No, sir,” he answered me, “but we’ll discover it together. Whereothers have failed, I’ll succeed. Never before has my Nautilus cruisedso far into these southernmost seas, but I repeat: it will go fartherstill.”“I’d like to believe you, captain,” I went on in a tone of somesarcasm. “Oh I do believe you! Let’s forge ahead! There are noobstacles for us! Let’s shatter this Ice Bank! Let’s blow it up, andif it still resists, let’s put wings on the Nautilus and fly over it!”“Over it, professor?” Captain Nemo replied serenely. “No, not over it,but under it.”“Under it!” I exclaimed.A sudden insight into Captain Nemo’s plans had just flashed through mymind. I understood. The marvelous talents of his Nautilus would be putto work once again in this superhuman undertaking!“I can see we’re starting to understand each other, professor,”Captain Nemo told me with a half smile. “You already glimpse thepotential—myself, I’d say the success—of this attempt. Maneuvers thataren’t feasible for an ordinary ship are easy for the Nautilus. If acontinent emerges at the pole, we’ll stop at that continent. But onthe other hand, if open sea washes the pole, we’ll go to that veryplace!”“Right,” I said, carried away by the captain’s logic. “Even though thesurface of the sea has solidified into ice, its lower strata are stillopen, thanks to that divine justice that puts the maximum density ofsalt water one degree above its freezing point. And if I’m notmistaken, the submerged part of this Ice Bank is in a four-to-oneratio to its emerging part.”“Very nearly, professor. For each foot of iceberg above the sea, thereare three more below. Now then, since these ice mountains don’t exceeda height of 100 meters, they sink only to a depth of 300 meters. Andwhat are 300 meters to the Nautilus?”“A mere nothing, sir.”“We could even go to greater depths and find that temperature layercommon to all ocean water, and there we’d brave with impunity the -30degrees or -40 degrees cold on the surface.”“True, sir, very true,” I replied with growing excitement.“Our sole difficulty,” Captain Nemo went on, “lies in our stayingsubmerged for several days without renewing our air supply.”“That’s all?” I answered. “The Nautilus has huge air tanks; we’ll fillthem up and they’ll supply all the oxygen we need.”“Good thinking, Professor Aronnax,” the captain replied with asmile. “But since I don’t want to be accused of foolhardiness, I’mgiving you all my objections in advance.”“You have more?”“Just one. If a sea exists at the South Pole, it’s possible this seamay be completely frozen over, so we couldn’t come up to the surface!”“My dear sir, have you forgotten that the Nautilus is armed with afearsome spur? Couldn’t it be launched diagonally against those tractsof ice, which would break open from the impact?”“Ah, professor, you’re full of ideas today!”“Besides, captain,” I added with still greater enthusiasm, “whywouldn’t we find open sea at the South Pole just as at the North Pole?The cold-temperature poles and the geographical poles don’t coincidein either the northern or southern hemispheres, and until proof to thecontrary, we can assume these two spots on the earth feature either acontinent or an ice-free ocean.”“I think as you do, Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo replied. “I’llonly point out that after raising so many objections against my plan,you’re now crushing me under arguments in its favor.”Captain Nemo was right. I was outdoing him in daring! It was I who wassweeping him to the pole. I was leading the way, I was out in front. . . but no, you silly fool! Captain Nemo already knew the pros andcons of this question, and it amused him to see you flying off intoimpossible fantasies!Nevertheless, he didn’t waste an instant. At his signal, the chiefofficer appeared. The two men held a quick exchange in theirincomprehensible language, and either the chief officer had beenalerted previously or he found the plan feasible, because he showed nosurprise.But as unemotional as he was, he couldn’t have been more impeccablyemotionless than Conseil when I told the fine lad our intention ofpushing on to the South Pole. He greeted my announcement with theusual “As master wishes,” and I had to be content with that. As forNed Land, no human shoulders ever executed a higher shrug than thepair belonging to our Canadian.“Honestly, sir,” he told me. “You and your Captain Nemo, I pity youboth!”“But we will go to the pole, Mr. Land.”“Maybe, but you won’t come back!”And Ned Land reentered his cabin, “to keep from doing somethingdesperate,” he said as he left me.Meanwhile preparations for this daring attempt were getting underway. The Nautilus’s powerful pumps forced air down into the tanks andstored it under high pressure. Near four o’clock Captain Nemo informedme that the platform hatches were about to be closed. I took a lastlook at the dense Ice Bank we were going to conquer. The weather wasfair, the skies reasonably clear, the cold quite brisk, namely -12degrees centigrade; but after the wind had lulled, this temperaturedidn’t seem too unbearable.Equipped with picks, some ten men climbed onto the Nautilus’s sidesand cracked loose the ice around the ship’s lower plating, which wassoon set free. This operation was swiftly executed because the freshice was still thin. We all reentered the interior. The main ballasttanks were filled with the water that hadn’t yet congealed at our lineof flotation. The Nautilus submerged without delay.I took a seat in the lounge with Conseil. Through the open window westared at the lower strata of this southernmost ocean. The thermometerrose again. The needle on the pressure gauge swerved over its dial.About 300 meters down, just as Captain Nemo had predicted, we cruisedbeneath the undulating surface of the Ice Bank. But the Nautilus sankdeeper still. It reached a depth of 800 meters. At the surface thiswater gave a temperature of -12 degrees centigrade, but now it gave nomore than -10 degrees. Two degrees had already been gained. Thanks toits heating equipment, the Nautilus’s temperature, needless to say,stayed at a much higher degree. Every maneuver was accomplished withextraordinary precision.“With all due respect to master,” Conseil told me, “we’ll pass it by.”“I fully expect to!” I replied in a tone of deep conviction.Now in open water, the Nautilus took a direct course to the polewithout veering from the 52nd meridian. From 67 degrees 30’ to 90degrees, twenty-two and a half degrees of latitude were left to cross,in other words, slightly more than 500 leagues. The Nautilus adoptedan average speed of twenty-six miles per hour, the speed of an expresstrain. If it kept up this pace, forty hours would do it for reachingthe pole.For part of the night, the novelty of our circumstances kept Conseiland me at the lounge window. The sea was lit by our beacon’s electricrays. But the depths were deserted. Fish didn’t linger in theseimprisoned waters. Here they found merely a passageway for going fromthe Antarctic Ocean to open sea at the pole. Our progress wasswift. You could feel it in the vibrations of the long steel hull.Near two o’clock in the morning, I went to snatch a few hours ofsleep. Conseil did likewise. I didn’t encounter Captain Nemo whilegoing down the gangways. I assumed that he was keeping to thepilothouse.The next day, March 19, at five o’clock in the morning, I was back atmy post in the lounge. The electric log indicated that the Nautilushad reduced speed. By then it was rising to the surface, butcautiously, while slowly emptying its ballast tanks.My heart was pounding. Would we emerge into the open and find thepolar air again?No. A jolt told me that the Nautilus had bumped the underbelly of theIce Bank, still quite thick to judge from the hollowness of theaccompanying noise. Indeed, we had “struck bottom,” to use nauticalterminology, but in the opposite direction and at a depth of 3,000feet. That gave us 4,000 feet of ice overhead, of which 1,000 feetemerged above water. So the Ice Bank was higher here than we had foundit on the outskirts. A circumstance less than encouraging.Several times that day, the Nautilus repeated the same experiment andalways it bumped against this surface that formed a ceiling aboveit. At certain moments the ship encountered ice at a depth of 900meters, denoting a thickness of 1,200 meters, of which 300 meters roseabove the level of the ocean. This height had tripled since the momentthe Nautilus had dived beneath the waves.I meticulously noted these different depths, obtaining the underwaterprofile of this upside-down mountain chain that stretched beneath thesea.By evening there was still no improvement in our situation. The icestayed between 400 and 500 meters deep. It was obviously shrinking,but what a barrier still lay between us and the surface of the ocean!By then it was eight o’clock. The air inside the Nautilus should havebeen renewed four hours earlier, following daily practice onboard. But I didn’t suffer very much, although Captain Nemo hadn’t yetmade demands on the supplementary oxygen in his air tanks.That night my sleep was fitful. Hope and fear besieged me by turns. Igot up several times. The Nautilus continued groping. Near threeo’clock in the morning, I observed that we encountered the Ice Bank’sunderbelly at a depth of only fifty meters. So only 150 feet separatedus from the surface of the water. Little by little the Ice Bank wasturning into an ice field again. The mountains were changing back intoplains.My eyes didn’t leave the pressure gauge. We kept rising on a diagonal,going along this shiny surface that sparkled beneath our electricrays. Above and below, the Ice Bank was subsiding in longgradients. Mile after mile it was growing thinner.Finally, at six o’clock in the morning on that memorable day of March19, the lounge door opened. Captain Nemo appeared.“Open sea!” he told me.CHAPTER 14The South PoleI RUSHED UP onto the platform. Yes, open sea! Barely a few sparsefloes, some moving icebergs; a sea stretching into the distance; hostsof birds in the air and myriads of fish under the waters, which variedfrom intense blue to olive green depending on the depth. Thethermometer marked 3 degrees centigrade. It was as if a comparativespringtime had been locked up behind that Ice Bank, whose distantmasses were outlined on the northern horizon.“Are we at the pole?” I asked the captain, my heart pounding.“I’ve no idea,” he answered me. “At noon we’ll fix our position.”“But will the sun show through this mist?” I said, staring at thegrayish sky.“No matter how faintly it shines, it will be enough for me,” thecaptain replied.To the south, ten miles from the Nautilus, a solitary islet rose to aheight of 200 meters. We proceeded toward it, but cautiously, becausethis sea could have been strewn with reefs.In an hour we had reached the islet. Two hours later we had completeda full circle around it. It measured four to five miles incircumference. A narrow channel separated it from a considerableshore, perhaps a continent whose limits we couldn’t see. The existenceof this shore seemed to bear out Commander Maury’s hypotheses. Inessence, this ingenious American has noted that between the South Poleand the 60th parallel, the sea is covered with floating ice ofdimensions much greater than any found in the north Atlantic. Fromthis fact he drew the conclusion that the Antarctic Circle mustcontain considerable shores, since icebergs can’t form on the highseas but only along coastlines. According to his calculations, thisfrozen mass enclosing the southernmost pole forms a vast ice cap whosewidth must reach 4,000 kilometers.Meanwhile, to avoid running aground, the Nautilus halted three cablelengths from a strand crowned by superb piles of rocks. The skiff waslaunched to sea. Two crewmen carrying instruments, the captain,Conseil, and I were on board. It was ten o’clock in the morning. Ihadn’t seen Ned Land. No doubt, in the presence of the South Pole, theCanadian hated having to eat his words.A few strokes of the oar brought the skiff to the sand, where it ranaground. Just as Conseil was about to jump ashore, I held him back.“Sir,” I told Captain Nemo, “to you belongs the honor of first settingfoot on this shore.”“Yes, sir,” the captain replied, “and if I have no hesitation intreading this polar soil, it’s because no human being until now hasleft a footprint here.”So saying, he leaped lightly onto the sand. His heart must have beenthrobbing with intense excitement. He scaled an overhanging rock thatended in a small promontory and there, mute and motionless, withcrossed arms and blazing eyes, he seemed to be laying claim to thesesouthernmost regions. After spending five minutes in this trance, heturned to us.“Whenever you’re ready, sir,” he called to me.I got out, Conseil at my heels, leaving the two men in the skiff.Over an extensive area, the soil consisted of that igneous gravelcalled “tuff,” reddish in color as if made from crushed bricks. Theground was covered with slag, lava flows, and pumice stones. Itsvolcanic origin was unmistakable. In certain localities thin smokeholes gave off a sulfurous odor, showing that the inner fires stillkept their wide-ranging power. Nevertheless, when I scaled a highescarpment, I could see no volcanoes within a radius of severalmiles. In these Antarctic districts, as is well known, Sir James ClarkRoss had found the craters of Mt. Erebus and Mt. Terror in fullyactive condition on the 167th meridian at latitude 77 degrees 32’.The vegetation on this desolate continent struck me as quitelimited. A few lichens of the species Usnea melanoxanthra sprawledover the black rocks. The whole meager flora of this region consistedof certain microscopic buds, rudimentary diatoms made up of a type ofcell positioned between two quartz-rich shells, plus long purple andcrimson fucus plants, buoyed by small air bladders and washed up onthe coast by the surf.The beach was strewn with mollusks: small mussels, limpets, smoothheart-shaped cockles, and especially some sea butterflies with oblong,membrane-filled bodies whose heads are formed from two roundedlobes. I also saw myriads of those northernmost sea butterflies threecentimeters long, which a baleen whale can swallow by the thousands inone gulp. The open waters at the shoreline were alive with thesedelightful pteropods, true butterflies of the sea.Among other zoophytes present in these shallows, there were a fewcoral tree forms that, according to Sir James Clark Ross, live inthese Antarctic seas at depths as great as 1,000 meters; then smallalcyon coral belonging to the species Procellaria pelagica, also alarge number of starfish unique to these climes, plus some featherstars spangling the sand.But it was in the air that life was superabundant. There variousspecies of birds flew and fluttered by the thousands, deafening uswith their calls. Crowding the rocks, other fowl watched without fearas we passed and pressed familiarly against our feet. These were auks,as agile and supple in water, where they are sometimes mistaken forfast bonito, as they are clumsy and heavy on land. They utteredoutlandish calls and participated in numerous public assemblies thatfeatured much noise but little action.Among other fowl I noted some sheathbills from the wading-bird family,the size of pigeons, white in color, the beak short and conical, theeyes framed by red circles. Conseil laid in a supply of them, becausewhen they’re properly cooked, these winged creatures make a pleasantdish. In the air there passed sooty albatross with four-meterwingspans, birds aptly dubbed “vultures of the ocean,” also giganticpetrels including several with arching wings, enthusiastic eaters ofseal that are known as quebrantahuesos,* and cape pigeons, a sort ofsmall duck, the tops of their bodies black and white—in short, a wholeseries of petrels, some whitish with wings trimmed in brown, othersblue and exclusive to these Antarctic seas, the former “so oily,” Itold Conseil, “that inhabitants of the Faroe Islands simply fit thebird with a wick, then light it up.”*Spanish: “ospreys.” Ed.“With that minor addition,” Conseil replied, “these fowl would makeperfect lamps! After this, we should insist that nature equip themwith wicks in advance!”Half a mile farther on, the ground was completely riddled with penguinnests, egg-laying burrows from which numerous birds emerged. LaterCaptain Nemo had hundreds of them hunted because their black flesh ishighly edible. They brayed like donkeys. The size of a goose withslate-colored bodies, white undersides, and lemon-colored neck bands,these animals let themselves be stoned to death without making anyeffort to get away.Meanwhile the mists didn’t clear, and by eleven o’clock the sun stillhadn’t made an appearance. Its absence disturbed me. Without it, nosights were possible. Then how could we tell whether we had reachedthe pole?When I rejoined Captain Nemo, I found him leaning silently against apiece of rock and staring at the sky. He seemed impatient,baffled. But what could we do? This daring and powerful man couldn’tcontrol the sun as he did the sea.Noon arrived without the orb of day appearing for a singleinstant. You couldn’t even find its hiding place behind the curtain ofmist. And soon this mist began to condense into snow.“Until tomorrow,” the captain said simply; and we went back to theNautilus, amid flurries in the air.During our absence the nets had been spread, and I observed withfascination the fish just hauled on board. The Antarctic seas serve asa refuge for an extremely large number of migratory fish that fleefrom storms in the subpolar zones, in truth only to slide down thegullets of porpoises and seals. I noted some one-decimeter southernbullhead, a species of whitish cartilaginous fish overrun with bluishgray stripes and armed with stings, then some Antarctic rabbitfishthree feet long, the body very slender, the skin a smooth silverwhite, the head rounded, the topside furnished with three fins, thesnout ending in a trunk that curved back toward the mouth. I sampledits flesh but found it tasteless, despite Conseil’s views, which werelargely approving.The blizzard lasted until the next day. It was impossible to stay onthe platform. From the lounge, where I was writing up the incidents ofthis excursion to the polar continent, I could hear the calls ofpetrel and albatross cavorting in the midst of the turmoil. TheNautilus didn’t stay idle, and cruising along the coast, it advancedsome ten miles farther south amid the half light left by the sun as itskimmed the edge of the horizon.The next day, March 20, it stopped snowing. The cold was a little morebrisk. The thermometer marked -2 degrees centigrade. The mist hadcleared, and on that day I hoped our noon sights could beaccomplished.Since Captain Nemo hadn’t yet appeared, only Conseil and I were takenashore by the skiff. The soil’s nature was still the same:volcanic. Traces of lava, slag, and basaltic rock were everywhere, butI couldn’t find the crater that had vomited them up. There as yonder,myriads of birds enlivened this part of the polar continent. But theyhad to share their dominion with huge herds of marine mammals thatlooked at us with gentle eyes. These were seals of various species,some stretched out on the ground, others lying on drifting ice floes,several leaving or reentering the sea. Having never dealt with man,they didn’t run off at our approach, and I counted enough of themthereabouts to provision a couple hundred ships.“Ye gods,” Conseil said, “it’s fortunate that Ned Land didn’t comewith us!”“Why so, Conseil?”“Because that madcap hunter would kill every animal here.”“Every animal may be overstating it, but in truth I doubt we couldkeep our Canadian friend from harpooning some of these magnificentcetaceans. Which would be an affront to Captain Nemo, since he hatesto slay harmless beasts needlessly.”“He’s right.”“Certainly, Conseil. But tell me, haven’t you finished classifyingthese superb specimens of marine fauna?”“Master is well aware,” Conseil replied, “that I’m not seasoned inpractical application. When master has told me these animals’ names. . .”“They’re seals and walruses.”“Two genera,” our scholarly Conseil hastened to say, “that belong tothe family Pinnipedia, order Carnivora, group Unguiculata, subclassMonodelphia, class Mammalia, branch Vertebrata.”“Very nice, Conseil,” I replied, “but these two genera of seals andwalruses are each divided into species, and if I’m not mistaken, wenow have a chance to actually look at them. Let’s.”It was eight o’clock in the morning. We had four hours to ourselvesbefore the sun could be productively observed. I guided our stepstoward a huge bay that made a crescent-shaped incision in the granitecliffs along the beach.There, all about us, I swear that the shores and ice floes werecrowded with marine mammals as far as the eye could see, and Iinvoluntarily looked around for old Proteus, that mythologicalshepherd who guarded King Neptune’s immense flocks. To be specific,these were seals. They formed distinct male-and-female groups, thefather watching over his family, the mother suckling her little ones,the stronger youngsters emancipated a few paces away. When thesemammals wanted to relocate, they moved in little jumps made bycontracting their bodies, clumsily helped by their imperfectlydeveloped flippers, which, as with their manatee relatives, formactual forearms. In the water, their ideal element, I must say theseanimals swim wonderfully thanks to their flexible backbones, narrowpelvises, close-cropped hair, and webbed feet. Resting on shore, theyassumed extremely graceful positions. Consequently, their gentlefeatures, their sensitive expressions equal to those of the loveliestwomen, their soft, limpid eyes, their charming poses, led the ancientsto glorify them by metamorphosing the males into sea gods and thefemales into mermaids.I drew Conseil’s attention to the considerable growth of the cerebrallobes found in these intelligent cetaceans. No mammal except man hasmore abundant cerebral matter. Accordingly, seals are quite capable ofbeing educated; they make good pets, and together with certain othernaturalists, I think these animals can be properly trained to performyeoman service as hunting dogs for fishermen.Most of these seals were sleeping on the rocks or the sand. Amongthose properly termed seals—which have no external ears, unlike sealions whose ears protrude—I observed several varieties of the speciesstenorhynchus, three meters long, with white hair, bulldog heads, andarmed with ten teeth in each jaw: four incisors in both the upper andlower, plus two big canines shaped like the fleur-de-lis. Among themslithered some sea elephants, a type of seal with a short, flexibletrunk; these are the giants of the species, with a circumference oftwenty feet and a length of ten meters. They didn’t move as weapproached.“Are these animals dangerous?” Conseil asked me.“Only if they’re attacked,” I replied. “But when these giant sealsdefend their little ones, their fury is dreadful, and it isn’t rarefor them to smash a fisherman’s longboat to bits.”“They’re within their rights,” Conseil answered.“I don’t say nay.”Two miles farther on, we were stopped by a promontory that screenedthe bay from southerly winds. It dropped straight down to the sea, andsurf foamed against it. From beyond this ridge there came fearsomebellows, such as a herd of cattle might produce.“Gracious,” Conseil put in, “a choir of bulls?”“No,” I said, “a choir of walruses.”“Are they fighting with each other?”“Either fighting or playing.”“With all due respect to master, this we must see.”“Then see it we must, Conseil.”And there we were, climbing these blackish rocks amid suddenlandslides and over stones slippery with ice. More than once I took atumble at the expense of my backside. Conseil, more cautious or morestable, barely faltered and would help me up, saying:“If master’s legs would kindly adopt a wider stance, master will keephis balance.”Arriving at the topmost ridge of this promontory, I could see vastwhite plains covered with walruses. These animals were playing amongthemselves. They were howling not in anger but in glee.Walruses resemble seals in the shape of their bodies and thearrangement of their limbs. But their lower jaws lack canines andincisors, and as for their upper canines, they consist of two tuskseighty centimeters long with a circumference of thirty-threecentimeters at the socket. Made of solid ivory, without striations,harder than elephant tusks, and less prone to yellowing, these teethare in great demand. Accordingly, walruses are the victims of amindless hunting that soon will destroy them all, since their huntersindiscriminately slaughter pregnant females and youngsters, and over4,000 individuals are destroyed annually.Passing near these unusual animals, I could examine them at my leisuresince they didn’t stir. Their hides were rough and heavy, a tan colorleaning toward a reddish brown; their coats were short and less thanabundant. Some were four meters long. More tranquil and less fearfulthan their northern relatives, they posted no sentinels on guard dutyat the approaches to their campsite.After examining this community of walruses, I decided to return in mytracks. It was eleven o’clock, and if Captain Nemo found conditionsfavorable for taking his sights, I wanted to be present at theoperation. But I held no hopes that the sun would make an appearancethat day. It was hidden from our eyes by clouds squeezed together onthe horizon. Apparently the jealous orb didn’t want to reveal thisinaccessible spot on the globe to any human being.Yet I decided to return to the Nautilus. We went along a steep, narrowpath that ran over the cliff’s summit. By 11:30 we had arrived at ourlanding place. The beached skiff had brought the captain ashore. Ispotted him standing on a chunk of basalt. His instruments were besidehim. His eyes were focused on the northern horizon, along which thesun was sweeping in its extended arc.I found a place near him and waited without speaking. Noon arrived,and just as on the day before, the sun didn’t put in an appearance.It was sheer bad luck. Our noon sights were still lacking. If wecouldn’t obtain them tomorrow, we would finally have to give up anyhope of fixing our position.In essence, it was precisely March 20. Tomorrow, the 21st, was the dayof the equinox; the sun would disappear below the horizon for sixmonths not counting refraction, and after its disappearance the longpolar night would begin. Following the September equinox, the sun hademerged above the northerly horizon, rising in long spirals untilDecember 21. At that time, the summer solstice of these southernmostdistricts, the sun had started back down, and tomorrow it would castits last rays.I shared my thoughts and fears with Captain Nemo.“You’re right, Professor Aronnax,” he told me. “If I can’t take thesun’s altitude tomorrow, I won’t be able to try again for another sixmonths. But precisely because sailors’ luck has led me into these season March 21, it will be easy to get our bearings if the noonday sundoes appear before our eyes.”“Why easy, captain?”“Because when the orb of day sweeps in such long spirals, it’sdifficult to measure its exact altitude above the horizon, and ourinstruments are open to committing serious errors.”“Then what can you do?”“I use only my chronometer,” Captain Nemo answered me. “At noontomorrow, March 21, if, after accounting for refraction, the sun’sdisk is cut exactly in half by the northern horizon, that will meanI’m at the South Pole.”“Right,” I said. “Nevertheless, it isn’t mathematically exact proof,because the equinox needn’t fall precisely at noon.”“No doubt, sir, but the error will be under 100 meters, and that’sclose enough for us. Until tomorrow then.”Captain Nemo went back on board. Conseil and I stayed behind untilfive o’clock, surveying the beach, observing and studying. The onlyunusual object I picked up was an auk’s egg of remarkable size, forwhich a collector would have paid more than 1,000 francs. Itscream-colored tint, plus the streaks and markings that decorated itlike so many hieroglyphics, made it a rare trinket. I placed it inConseil’s hands, and holding it like precious porcelain from China,that cautious, sure-footed lad got it back to the Nautilus in onepiece.There I put this rare egg inside one of the glass cases in themuseum. I ate supper, feasting with appetite on an excellent piece ofseal liver whose flavor reminded me of pork. Then I went to bed; butnot without praying, like a good Hindu, for the favors of the radiantorb.The next day, March 21, bright and early at five o’clock in themorning, I climbed onto the platform. I found Captain Nemo there.“The weather is clearing a bit,” he told me. “I have high hopes. Afterbreakfast we’ll make our way ashore and choose an observation post.”This issue settled, I went to find Ned Land. I wanted to take him withme. The obstinate Canadian refused, and I could clearly see that histight-lipped mood and his bad temper were growing by the day. Underthe circumstances I ultimately wasn’t sorry that he refused. In truth,there were too many seals ashore, and it would never do to expose thisimpulsive fisherman to such temptations.Breakfast over, I made my way ashore. The Nautilus had gone a few moremiles during the night. It lay well out, a good league from the coast,which was crowned by a sharp peak 400 to 500 meters high. In additionto me, the skiff carried Captain Nemo, two crewmen, and theinstruments—in other words, a chronometer, a spyglass, and abarometer.During our crossing I saw numerous baleen whales belonging to thethree species unique to these southernmost seas: the bowhead whale (or“right whale,” according to the English), which has no dorsal fin; thehumpback whale from the genus Balaenoptera (in other words, “wingedwhales”), beasts with wrinkled bellies and huge whitish fins that,genus name regardless, do not yet form wings; and the finback whale,yellowish brown, the swiftest of all cetaceans. This powerful animalis audible from far away when it sends up towering spouts of air andsteam that resemble swirls of smoke. Herds of these different mammalswere playing about in the tranquil waters, and I could easily see thatthis Antarctic polar basin now served as a refuge for those cetaceanstoo relentlessly pursued by hunters.I also noted long, whitish strings of salps, a type of mollusk foundin clusters, and some jellyfish of large size that swayed in theeddies of the billows.By nine o’clock we had pulled up to shore. The sky was growingbrighter. Clouds were fleeing to the south. Mists were rising from thecold surface of the water. Captain Nemo headed toward the peak, whichhe no doubt planned to make his observatory. It was an arduous climbover sharp lava and pumice stones in the midst of air often reekingwith sulfurous fumes from the smoke holes. For a man out of practiceat treading land, the captain scaled the steepest slopes with a suppleagility I couldn’t equal, and which would have been envied by huntersof Pyrenees mountain goats.It took us two hours to reach the summit of this half-crystal,half-basalt peak. From there our eyes scanned a vast sea, whichscrawled its boundary line firmly against the background of thenorthern sky. At our feet: dazzling tracts of white. Over our heads: apale azure, clear of mists. North of us: the sun’s disk, like a ballof fire already cut into by the edge of the horizon. From the heart ofthe waters: jets of liquid rising like hundreds of magnificentbouquets. Far off, like a sleeping cetacean: the Nautilus. Behind usto the south and east: an immense shore, a chaotic heap of rocks andice whose limits we couldn’t see.Arriving at the summit of this peak, Captain Nemo carefully determinedits elevation by means of his barometer, since he had to take thisfactor into account in his noon sights.At 11:45 the sun, by then seen only by refraction, looked like agolden disk, dispersing its last rays over this deserted continent anddown to these seas not yet plowed by the ships of man.Captain Nemo had brought a spyglass with a reticular eyepiece, whichcorrected the sun’s refraction by means of a mirror, and he used it toobserve the orb sinking little by little along a very extendeddiagonal that reached below the horizon. I held the chronometer. Myheart was pounding mightily. If the lower half of the sun’s diskdisappeared just as the chronometer said noon, we were right at thepole.“Noon!” I called.“The South Pole!” Captain Nemo replied in a solemn voice, handing methe spyglass, which showed the orb of day cut into two exactly equalparts by the horizon.I stared at the last rays wreathing this peak, while shadows weregradually climbing its gradients.Just then, resting his hand on my shoulder, Captain Nemo said to me:“In 1600, sir, the Dutchman Gheritk was swept by storms and currents,reaching latitude 64 degrees south and discovering the South ShetlandIslands. On January 17, 1773, the famous Captain Cook went along the38th meridian, arriving at latitude 67 degrees 30’; and on January 30,1774, along the 109th meridian, he reached latitude 71 degrees 15’. In1819 the Russian Bellinghausen lay on the 69th parallel, and in 1821on the 66th at longitude 111 degrees west. In 1820 the EnglishmanBransfield stopped at 65 degrees. That same year the American Morrel,whose reports are dubious, went along the 42nd meridian, finding opensea at latitude 70 degrees 14’. In 1825 the Englishman Powell wasunable to get beyond 62 degrees. That same year a humble sealfisherman, the Englishman Weddell, went as far as latitude 72 degrees14’ on the 35th meridian, and as far as 74 degrees 15’ on the 36th. In1829 the Englishman Forster, commander of the Chanticleer, laid claimto the Antarctic continent in latitude 63 degrees 26’ and longitude 66degrees 26’. On February 1, 1831, the Englishman Biscoe discoveredEnderby Land at latitude 68 degrees 50’, Adelaide Land at latitude 67degrees on February 5, 1832, and Graham Land at latitude 64 degrees45’ on February 21. In 1838 the Frenchman Dumont d’Urville stopped atthe Ice Bank in latitude 62 degrees 57’, sighting the Louis-PhilippePeninsula; on January 21 two years later, at a new southerly positionof 66 degrees 30’, he named the Adélie Coast and eight days later, theClarie Coast at 64 degrees 40’. In 1838 the American Wilkes advancedas far as the 69th parallel on the 100th meridian. In 1839 theEnglishman Balleny discovered the Sabrina Coast at the edge of thepolar circle. Lastly, on January 12, 1842, with his ships, the Erebusand the Terror, the Englishman Sir James Clark Ross found VictoriaLand in latitude 70 degrees 56’ and longitude 171 degrees 7’ east; onthe 23rd of that same month, he reached the 74th parallel, a positiondenoting the Farthest South attained until then; on the 27th he lay at76 degrees 8’; on the 28th at 77 degrees 32’; on February 2 at 78degrees 4’; and late in 1842 he returned to 71 degrees but couldn’tget beyond it. Well now! In 1868, on this 21st day of March, I myself,Captain Nemo, have reached the South Pole at 90 degrees, and I herebyclaim this entire part of the globe, equal to one-sixth of the knowncontinents.”“In the name of which sovereign, captain?”“In my own name, sir!”So saying, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag bearing a gold “N” onits quartered bunting. Then, turning toward the orb of day, whose lastrays were licking at the sea’s horizon:“Farewell, O sun!” he called. “Disappear, O radiant orb! Retirebeneath this open sea, and let six months of night spread theirshadows over my new domains!”CHAPTER 15Accident or Incident?THE NEXT DAY, March 22, at six o’clock in the morning, preparationsfor departure began. The last gleams of twilight were melting intonight. The cold was brisk. The constellations were glittering withstartling intensity. The wonderful Southern Cross, polar star of theAntarctic regions, twinkled at its zenith.The thermometer marked -12 degrees centigrade, and a fresh breeze lefta sharp nip in the air. Ice floes were increasing over the openwater. The sea was starting to congeal everywhere. Numerous blackishpatches were spreading over its surface, announcing the imminentformation of fresh ice. Obviously this southernmost basin froze overduring its six-month winter and became utterly inaccessible. Whathappened to the whales during this period? No doubt they went beneaththe Ice Bank to find more feasible seas. As for seals and walruses,they were accustomed to living in the harshest climates and stayed onin these icy waterways. These animals know by instinct how to gougeholes in the ice fields and keep them continually open; they go tothese holes to breathe. Once the birds have migrated northward toescape the cold, these marine mammals remain as sole lords of thepolar continent.Meanwhile the ballast tanks filled with water and the Nautilus sankslowly. At a depth of 1,000 feet, it stopped. Its propeller churnedthe waves and it headed due north at a speed of fifteen miles perhour. Near the afternoon it was already cruising under the immensefrozen carapace of the Ice Bank.As a precaution, the panels in the lounge stayed closed, because theNautilus’s hull could run afoul of some submerged block of ice. So Ispent the day putting my notes into final form. My mind was completelywrapped up in my memories of the pole. We had reached thatinaccessible spot without facing exhaustion or danger, as if ourseagoing passenger carriage had glided there on railroad tracks. Andnow we had actually started our return journey. Did it still havecomparable surprises in store for me? I felt sure it did, soinexhaustible is this series of underwater wonders! As it was, in thefive and a half months since fate had brought us on board, we hadcleared 14,000 leagues, and over this track longer than the earth’sequator, so many fascinating or frightening incidents had beguiled ourvoyage: that hunting trip in the Crespo forests, our running agroundin the Torres Strait, the coral cemetery, the pearl fisheries ofCeylon, the Arabic tunnel, the fires of Santorini, those millions inthe Bay of Vigo, Atlantis, the South Pole! During the night all thesememories crossed over from one dream to the next, not giving my braina moment’s rest.At three o’clock in the morning, I was awakened by a violentcollision. I sat up in bed, listening in the darkness, and then wassuddenly hurled into the middle of my stateroom. Apparently theNautilus had gone aground, then heeled over sharply.Leaning against the walls, I dragged myself down the gangways to thelounge, whose ceiling lights were on. The furniture had been knockedover. Fortunately the glass cases were solidly secured at the base andhad stood fast. Since we were no longer vertical, the starboardpictures were glued to the tapestries, while those to port had theirlower edges hanging a foot away from the wall. So the Nautilus waslying on its starboard side, completely stationary to boot.In its interior I heard the sound of footsteps and muffled voices. ButCaptain Nemo didn’t appear. Just as I was about to leave the lounge,Ned Land and Conseil entered.“What happened?” I instantly said to them.“I came to ask master that,” Conseil replied.“Damnation!” the Canadian exclaimed. “I know full well what happened!The Nautilus has gone aground, and judging from the way it’s listing,I don’t think it’ll pull through like that first time in the TorresStrait.”“But,” I asked, “are we at least back on the surface of the sea?”“We have no idea,” Conseil replied.“It’s easy to find out,” I answered.I consulted the pressure gauge. Much to my surprise, it indicated adepth of 360 meters.“What’s the meaning of this?” I exclaimed.“We must confer with Captain Nemo,” Conseil said.“But where do we find him?” Ned Land asked.“Follow me,” I told my two companions.We left the lounge. Nobody in the library. Nobody by the centralcompanionway or the crew’s quarters. I assumed that Captain Nemo wasstationed in the pilothouse. Best to wait. The three of us returned tothe lounge.I’ll skip over the Canadian’s complaints. He had good grounds for anoutburst. I didn’t answer him back, letting him blow off all the steamhe wanted.We had been left to ourselves for twenty minutes, trying to detect thetiniest noises inside the Nautilus, when Captain Nemo entered. Hedidn’t seem to see us. His facial features, usually so emotionless,revealed a certain uneasiness. He studied the compass and pressuregauge in silence, then went and put his finger on the world map at aspot in the sector depicting the southernmost seas.I hesitated to interrupt him. But some moments later, when he turnedto me, I threw back at him a phrase he had used in the Torres Strait:“An incident, captain?”“No, sir,” he replied, “this time an accident.”“Serious?”“Perhaps.”“Is there any immediate danger?”“No.”“The Nautilus has run aground?”“Yes.”“And this accident came about . . . ?”“Through nature’s unpredictability, not man’s incapacity. No errorswere committed in our maneuvers. Nevertheless, we can’t prevent a lossof balance from taking its toll. One may defy human laws, but no onecan withstand the laws of nature.”Captain Nemo had picked an odd time to philosophize. All in all, thisreply told me nothing.“May I learn, sir,” I asked him, “what caused this accident?”“An enormous block of ice, an entire mountain, has toppled over,” heanswered me. “When an iceberg is eroded at the base by warmer watersor by repeated collisions, its center of gravity rises. Then itsomersaults, it turns completely upside down. That’s what happenedhere. When it overturned, one of these blocks hit the Nautilus as itwas cruising under the waters. Sliding under our hull, this block thenraised us with irresistible power, lifting us into less congestedstrata where we now lie on our side.”“But can’t we float the Nautilus clear by emptying its ballast tanks,to regain our balance?”“That, sir, is being done right now. You can hear the pumpsworking. Look at the needle on the pressure gauge. It indicates thatthe Nautilus is rising, but this block of ice is rising with us, anduntil some obstacle halts its upward movement, our position won’tchange.”Indeed, the Nautilus kept the same heel to starboard. No doubt itwould straighten up once the block came to a halt. But before thathappened, who knew if we might not hit the underbelly of the Ice Bankand be hideously squeezed between two frozen surfaces?I mused on all the consequences of this situation. Captain Nemo didn’tstop studying the pressure gauge. Since the toppling of this iceberg,the Nautilus had risen about 150 feet, but it still stayed at the sameangle to the perpendicular.Suddenly a slight movement could be felt over the hull. Obviously theNautilus was straightening a bit. Objects hanging in the lounge werevisibly returning to their normal positions. The walls wereapproaching the vertical. Nobody said a word. Hearts pounding, wecould see and feel the ship righting itself. The floor was becominghorizontal beneath our feet. Ten minutes went by.“Finally, we’re upright!” I exclaimed.“Yes,” Captain Nemo said, heading to the lounge door.“But will we float off?” I asked him.“Certainly,” he replied, “since the ballast tanks aren’t yet empty,and when they are, the Nautilus must rise to the surface of the sea.”The captain went out, and soon I saw that at his orders, the Nautilushad halted its upward movement. In fact, it soon would have hit theunderbelly of the Ice Bank, but it had stopped in time and wasfloating in midwater.“That was a close call!” Conseil then said.“Yes. We could have been crushed between these masses of ice, or atleast imprisoned between them. And then, with no way to renew our airsupply. . . . Yes, that was a close call!”“If it’s over with!” Ned Land muttered.I was unwilling to get into a pointless argument with the Canadian anddidn’t reply. Moreover, the panels opened just then, and the outsidelight burst through the uncovered windows.We were fully afloat, as I have said; but on both sides of theNautilus, about ten meters away, there rose dazzling walls ofice. There also were walls above and below. Above, because the IceBank’s underbelly spread over us like an immense ceiling. Below,because the somersaulting block, shifting little by little, had foundpoints of purchase on both side walls and had gotten jammed betweenthem. The Nautilus was imprisoned in a genuine tunnel of ice abouttwenty meters wide and filled with quiet water. So the ship couldeasily exit by going either ahead or astern, sinking a few hundredmeters deeper, and then taking an open passageway beneath the IceBank.The ceiling lights were off, yet the lounge was still brightlylit. This was due to the reflecting power of the walls of ice, whichthrew the beams of our beacon right back at us. Words cannot describethe effects produced by our galvanic rays on these huge, whimsicallysculpted blocks, whose every angle, ridge, and facet gave off adifferent glow depending on the nature of the veins running inside theice. It was a dazzling mine of gems, in particular sapphires andemeralds, whose jets of blue and green crisscrossed. Here and there,opaline hues of infinite subtlety raced among sparks of light thatwere like so many fiery diamonds, their brilliance more than any eyecould stand. The power of our beacon was increased a hundredfold, likea lamp shining through the biconvex lenses of a world-classlighthouse.“How beautiful!” Conseil exclaimed.“Yes,” I said, “it’s a wonderful sight! Isn’t it, Ned?”“Oh damnation, yes!” Ned Land shot back. “It’s superb! I’m furiousthat I have to admit it. Nobody has ever seen the like. But this sightcould cost us dearly. And in all honesty, I think we’re looking atthings God never intended for human eyes.”Ned was right. It was too beautiful. All at once a yell from Conseilmade me turn around.“What is it?” I asked.“Master must close his eyes! Master mustn’t look!”With that, Conseil clapped his hands over his eyes.“But what’s wrong, my boy?”“I’ve been dazzled, struck blind!”Involuntarily my eyes flew to the window, but I couldn’t stand thefire devouring it.I realized what had happened. The Nautilus had just started off atgreat speed. All the tranquil glimmers of the ice walls had thenchanged into blazing streaks. The sparkles from these myriads ofdiamonds were merging with each other. Swept along by its propeller,the Nautilus was traveling through a sheath of flashing light.Then the panels in the lounge closed. We kept our hands over our eyes,which were utterly saturated with those concentric gleams that swirlbefore the retina when sunlight strikes it too intensely. It took sometime to calm our troubled vision.Finally we lowered our hands.“Ye gods, I never would have believed it,” Conseil said.“And I still don’t believe it!” the Canadian shot back.“When we return to shore, jaded from all these natural wonders,”Conseil added, “think how we’ll look down on those pitiful landmasses, those puny works of man! No, the civilized world won’t be goodenough for us!”Such words from the lips of this emotionless Flemish boy showed thatour enthusiasm was near the boiling point. But the Canadian didn’tfail to throw his dram of cold water over us.“The civilized world!” he said, shaking his head. “Don’t worry,Conseil my friend, we’re never going back to that world!”By this point it was five o’clock in the morning. Just then there wasa collision in the Nautilus’s bow. I realized that its spur had justbumped a block of ice. It must have been a faulty maneuver becausethis underwater tunnel was obstructed by such blocks and didn’t makefor easy navigating. So I had assumed that Captain Nemo, in adjustinghis course, would go around each obstacle or would hug the walls andfollow the windings of the tunnel. In either case our forward motionwouldn’t receive an absolute check. Nevertheless, contrary to myexpectations, the Nautilus definitely began to move backward.“We’re going astern?” Conseil said.“Yes,” I replied. “Apparently the tunnel has no way out at this end.”“And so . . . ?”“So,” I said, “our maneuvers are quite simple. We’ll return in ourtracks and go out the southern opening. That’s all.”As I spoke, I tried to sound more confident than I reallyfelt. Meanwhile the Nautilus accelerated its backward movement, andrunning with propeller in reverse, it swept us along at great speed.“This’ll mean a delay,” Ned said.“What are a few hours more or less, so long as we get out.”“Yes,” Ned Land repeated, “so long as we get out!”I strolled for a little while from the lounge into the library. Mycompanions kept their seats and didn’t move. Soon I threw myself downon a couch and picked up a book, which my eyes skimmed mechanically.A quarter of an hour later, Conseil approached me, saying:“Is it deeply fascinating, this volume master is reading?”“Tremendously fascinating,” I replied.“I believe it. Master is reading his own book!”“My own book?”Indeed, my hands were holding my own work on the great ocean depths. Ihadn’t even suspected. I closed the book and resumed my strolling. Nedand Conseil stood up to leave.“Stay here, my friends,” I said, stopping them. “Let’s stay togetheruntil we’re out of this blind alley.”“As master wishes,” Conseil replied.The hours passed. I often studied the instruments hanging on thelounge wall. The pressure gauge indicated that the Nautilus stayed ata constant depth of 300 meters, the compass that it kept headingsouth, the log that it was traveling at a speed of twenty miles perhour, an excessive speed in such a cramped area. But Captain Nemo knewthat by this point there was no such thing as too fast, since minuteswere now worth centuries.At 8:25 a second collision took place. This time astern. I grewpale. My companions came over. I clutched Conseil’s hand. Our eyesquestioned each other, and more directly than if our thoughts had beentranslated into words.Just then the captain entered the lounge. I went to him.“Our path is barred to the south?” I asked him.“Yes, sir. When it overturned, that iceberg closed off every exit.”“We’re boxed in?”“Yes.”CHAPTER 16Shortage of AirCONSEQUENTLY, above, below, and around the Nautilus, there wereimpenetrable frozen walls. We were the Ice Bank’s prisoners! TheCanadian banged a table with his fearsome fist. Conseil kept still. Istared at the captain. His face had resumed its usualemotionlessness. He crossed his arms. He pondered. The Nautilus didnot stir.The captain then broke into speech:“Gentlemen,” he said in a calm voice, “there are two ways of dyingunder the conditions in which we’re placed.”This inexplicable individual acted like a mathematics professorworking out a problem for his pupils.“The first way,” he went on, “is death by crushing. The second isdeath by asphyxiation. I don’t mention the possibility of death bystarvation because the Nautilus’s provisions will certainly lastlonger than we will. Therefore, let’s concentrate on our chances ofbeing crushed or asphyxiated.”“As for asphyxiation, captain,” I replied, “that isn’t a cause foralarm, because the air tanks are full.”“True,” Captain Nemo went on, “but they’ll supply air for only twodays. Now then, we’ve been buried beneath the waters for thirty-sixhours, and the Nautilus’s heavy atmosphere already needs renewing. Inanother forty-eight hours, our reserve air will be used up.”“Well then, captain, let’s free ourselves within forty-eight hours!”“We’ll try to at least, by cutting through one of these wallssurrounding us.”“Which one?” I asked.“Borings will tell us that. I’m going to ground the Nautilus on thelower shelf, then my men will put on their diving suits and attack thethinnest of these ice walls.”“Can the panels in the lounge be left open?”“Without ill effect. We’re no longer in motion.”Captain Nemo went out. Hissing sounds soon told me that water wasbeing admitted into the ballast tanks. The Nautilus slowly settled andrested on the icy bottom at a depth of 350 meters, the depth at whichthe lower shelf of ice lay submerged.“My friends,” I said, “we’re in a serious predicament, but I’mcounting on your courage and energy.”“Sir,” the Canadian replied, “this is no time to bore you with mycomplaints. I’m ready to do anything I can for the common good.”“Excellent, Ned,” I said, extending my hand to the Canadian.“I might add,” he went on, “that I’m as handy with a pick as aharpoon. If I can be helpful to the captain, he can use me any way hewants.”“He won’t turn down your assistance. Come along, Ned.”I led the Canadian to the room where the Nautilus’s men were puttingon their diving suits. I informed the captain of Ned’s proposition,which was promptly accepted. The Canadian got into his underwatercostume and was ready as soon as his fellow workers. Each of themcarried on his back a Rouquayrol device that the air tanks hadsupplied with a generous allowance of fresh oxygen. A considerable butnecessary drain on the Nautilus’s reserves. As for the Ruhmkorfflamps, they were unnecessary in the midst of these brilliant waterssaturated with our electric rays.After Ned was dressed, I reentered the lounge, whose windows had beenuncovered; stationed next to Conseil, I examined the stratasurrounding and supporting the Nautilus.Some moments later, we saw a dozen crewmen set foot on the shelf ofice, among them Ned Land, easily recognized by his tallfigure. Captain Nemo was with them.Before digging into the ice, the captain had to obtain borings, toinsure working in the best direction. Long bores were driven into theside walls; but after fifteen meters, the instruments were stillimpeded by the thickness of those walls. It was futile to attack theceiling since that surface was the Ice Bank itself, more than 400meters high. Captain Nemo then bored into the lower surface. There wewere separated from the sea by a ten-meter barrier. That’s how thickthe iceberg was. From this point on, it was an issue of cutting out apiece equal in surface area to the Nautilus’s waterline. This meantdetaching about 6,500 cubic meters, to dig a hole through which theship could descend below this tract of ice.Work began immediately and was carried on with tirelesstenacity. Instead of digging all around the Nautilus, which would haveentailed even greater difficulties, Captain Nemo had an immense trenchoutlined on the ice, eight meters from our port quarter. Then his mensimultaneously staked it off at several points around itscircumference. Soon their picks were vigorously attacking this compactmatter, and huge chunks were loosened from its mass. These chunksweighed less than the water, and by an unusual effect of specificgravity, each chunk took wing, as it were, to the roof of the tunnel,which thickened above by as much as it diminished below. But thishardly mattered so long as the lower surface kept growing thinner.After two hours of energetic work, Ned Land reentered, exhausted. Heand his companions were replaced by new workmen, including Conseil andme. The Nautilus’s chief officer supervised us.The water struck me as unusually cold, but I warmed up promptly whilewielding my pick. My movements were quite free, although they wereexecuted under a pressure of thirty atmospheres.After two hours of work, reentering to snatch some food and rest, Ifound a noticeable difference between the clean elastic fluid suppliedme by the Rouquayrol device and the Nautilus’s atmosphere, which wasalready charged with carbon dioxide. The air hadn’t been renewed inforty-eight hours, and its life-giving qualities were considerablyweakened. Meanwhile, after twelve hours had gone by, we had removedfrom the outlined surface area a slice of ice only one meter thick,hence about 600 cubic meters. Assuming the same work would beaccomplished every twelve hours, it would still take five nights andfour days to see the undertaking through to completion.“Five nights and four days!” I told my companions. “And we have oxygenin the air tanks for only two days.”“Without taking into account,” Ned answered, “that once we’re out ofthis damned prison, we’ll still be cooped up beneath the Ice Bank,without any possible contact with the open air!”An apt remark. For who could predict the minimum time we would need tofree ourselves? Before the Nautilus could return to the surface of thewaves, couldn’t we all die of asphyxiation? Were this ship andeveryone on board doomed to perish in this tomb of ice? It was adreadful state of affairs. But we faced it head-on, each one of usdetermined to do his duty to the end.During the night, in line with my forecasts, a new one-meter slice wasremoved from this immense socket. But in the morning, wearing mydiving suit, I was crossing through the liquid mass in a temperatureof -6 degrees to -7 degrees centigrade, when I noted that little bylittle the side walls were closing in on each other. The liquid stratafarthest from the trench, not warmed by the movements of workmen andtools, were showing a tendency to solidify. In the face of thisimminent new danger, what would happen to our chances for salvation,and how could we prevent this liquid medium from solidifying, thencracking the Nautilus’s hull like glass?I didn’t tell my two companions about this new danger. There was nopoint in dampening the energy they were putting into our arduousrescue work. But when I returned on board, I mentioned this seriouscomplication to Captain Nemo.“I know,” he told me in that calm tone the most dreadful outlookcouldn’t change. “It’s one more danger, but I don’t know any way ofwarding it off. Our sole chance for salvation is to work faster thanthe water solidifies. We’ve got to get there first, that’s all.”Get there first! By then I should have been used to this type of talk!For several hours that day, I wielded my pick doggedly. The work keptme going. Besides, working meant leaving the Nautilus, which meantbreathing the clean oxygen drawn from the air tanks and supplied byour equipment, which meant leaving the thin, foul air behind.Near evening one more meter had been dug from the trench. When Ireturned on board, I was wellnigh asphyxiated by the carbon dioxidesaturating the air. Oh, if only we had the chemical methods that wouldenable us to drive out this noxious gas! There was no lack ofoxygen. All this water contained a considerable amount, and after itwas decomposed by our powerful batteries, this life-giving elasticfluid could have been restored to us. I had thought it all out, but tono avail because the carbon dioxide produced by our breathingpermeated every part of the ship. To absorb it, we would need to fillcontainers with potassium hydroxide and shake them continually. Butthis substance was missing on board and nothing else could replace it.That evening Captain Nemo was forced to open the spigots of his airtanks and shoot a few spouts of fresh oxygen through the Nautilus’sinterior. Without this precaution we wouldn’t have awakened thefollowing morning.The next day, March 26, I returned to my miner’s trade, working toremove the fifth meter. The Ice Bank’s side walls and underbelly hadvisibly thickened. Obviously they would come together before theNautilus could break free. For an instant I was gripped by despair. Mypick nearly slipped from my hands. What was the point of this diggingif I was to die smothered and crushed by this water turning to stone,a torture undreamed of by even the wildest savages! I felt like I waslying in the jaws of a fearsome monster, jaws irresistibly closing.Supervising our work, working himself, Captain Nemo passed near mejust then. I touched him with my hand and pointed to the walls of ourprison. The starboard wall had moved forward to a point less than fourmeters from the Nautilus’s hull.The captain understood and gave me a signal to follow him. We returnedon board. My diving suit removed, I went with him to the lounge.“Professor Aronnax,” he told me, “this calls for heroic measures, orwe’ll be sealed up in this solidified water as if it were cement.”“Yes!” I said. “But what can we do?”“Oh,” he exclaimed, “if only my Nautilus were strong enough to standthat much pressure without being crushed!”“Well?” I asked, not catching the captain’s meaning.“Don’t you understand,” he went on, “that the congealing of this watercould come to our rescue? Don’t you see that by solidifying, it couldburst these tracts of ice imprisoning us, just as its freezing canburst the hardest stones? Aren’t you aware that this force could bethe instrument of our salvation rather than our destruction?”“Yes, captain, maybe so. But whatever resistance to crushing theNautilus may have, it still couldn’t stand such dreadful pressures,and it would be squashed as flat as a piece of sheet iron.”“I know it, sir. So we can’t rely on nature to rescue us, only our ownefforts. We must counteract this solidification. We must hold it incheck. Not only are the side walls closing in, but there aren’t tenfeet of water ahead or astern of the Nautilus. All around us, thisfreeze is gaining fast.”“How long,” I asked, “will the oxygen in the air tanks enable us tobreathe on board?”The captain looked me straight in the eye.“After tomorrow,” he said, “the air tanks will be empty!”I broke out in a cold sweat. But why should I have been startled bythis reply? On March 22 the Nautilus had dived under the open watersat the pole. It was now the 26th. We had lived off the ship’s storesfor five days! And all remaining breathable air had to be saved forthe workmen. Even today as I write these lines, my sensations are sointense that an involuntary terror sweeps over me, and my lungs stillseem short of air!Meanwhile, motionless and silent, Captain Nemo stood lost inthought. An idea visibly crossed his mind. But he seemed to brush itaside. He told himself no. At last these words escaped his lips:“Boiling water!” he muttered.“Boiling water?” I exclaimed.“Yes, sir. We’re shut up in a relatively confined area. If theNautilus’s pumps continually injected streams of boiling water intothis space, wouldn’t that raise its temperature and delay itsfreezing?”“It’s worth trying!” I said resolutely.“So let’s try it, professor.”By then the thermometer gave -7 degrees centigrade outside. CaptainNemo led me to the galley where a huge distilling mechanism was atwork, supplying drinking water via evaporation. The mechanism wasloaded with water, and the full electric heat of our batteries wasthrown into coils awash in liquid. In a few minutes the water reached100 degrees centigrade. It was sent to the pumps while new waterreplaced it in the process. The heat generated by our batteries was sointense that after simply going through the mechanism, water drawncold from the sea arrived boiling hot at the body of the pump.The steaming water was injected into the icy water outside, and afterthree hours had passed, the thermometer gave the exterior temperatureas -6 degrees centigrade. That was one degree gained. Two hours laterthe thermometer gave only -4 degrees.After I monitored the operation’s progress, double-checking it withmany inspections, I told the captain, “It’s working.”“I think so,” he answered me. “We’ve escaped being crushed. Now wehave only asphyxiation to fear.”During the night the water temperature rose to -1 degreescentigrade. The injections couldn’t get it to go a single degreehigher. But since salt water freezes only at -2 degrees, I was finallyassured that there was no danger of it solidifying.By the next day, March 27, six meters of ice had been torn from thesocket. Only four meters were left to be removed. That still meantforty-eight hours of work. The air couldn’t be renewed in theNautilus’s interior. Accordingly, that day it kept getting worse.An unbearable heaviness weighed me down. Near three o’clock in theafternoon, this agonizing sensation affected me to an intensedegree. Yawns dislocated my jaws. My lungs were gasping in their questfor that enkindling elastic fluid required for breathing, now growingscarcer and scarcer. My mind was in a daze. I lay outstretched,strength gone, nearly unconscious. My gallant Conseil felt the samesymptoms, suffered the same sufferings, yet never left my side. Heheld my hand, he kept encouraging me, and I even heard him mutter:“Oh, if only I didn’t have to breathe, to leave more air for master!”It brought tears to my eyes to hear him say these words.Since conditions inside were universally unbearable, how eagerly, howhappily, we put on our diving suits to take our turns working! Picksrang out on that bed of ice. Arms grew weary, hands were rubbed raw,but who cared about exhaustion, what difference were wounds?Life-sustaining air reached our lungs! We could breathe! We couldbreathe!And yet nobody prolonged his underwater work beyond the time allottedhim. His shift over, each man surrendered to a gasping companion theair tank that would revive him. Captain Nemo set the example and wasforemost in submitting to this strict discipline. When his time wasup, he yielded his equipment to another and reentered the foul air onboard, always calm, unflinching, and uncomplaining.That day the usual work was accomplished with even greaterenergy. Over the whole surface area, only two meters were left to beremoved. Only two meters separated us from the open sea. But theship’s air tanks were nearly empty. The little air that remained hadto be saved for the workmen. Not an atom for the Nautilus!When I returned on board, I felt half suffocated. What a night! I’munable to depict it. Such sufferings are indescribable. The next day Iwas short-winded. Headaches and staggering fits of dizziness made mereel like a drunk. My companions were experiencing the samesymptoms. Some crewmen were at their last gasp.That day, the sixth of our imprisonment, Captain Nemo concluded thatpicks and mattocks were too slow to deal with the ice layer stillseparating us from open water—and he decided to crush this layer. Theman had kept his energy and composure. He had subdued physical painwith moral strength. He could still think, plan, and act.At his orders the craft was eased off, in other words, it was raisedfrom its icy bed by a change in its specific gravity. When it wasafloat, the crew towed it, leading it right above the immense trenchoutlined to match the ship’s waterline. Next the ballast tanks filledwith water, the boat sank, and was fitted into its socket.Just then the whole crew returned on board, and the double outsidedoor was closed. By this point the Nautilus was resting on a bed ofice only one meter thick and drilled by bores in a thousand places.The stopcocks of the ballast tanks were then opened wide, and 100cubic meters of water rushed in, increasing the Nautilus’s weight by100,000 kilograms.We waited, we listened, we forgot our sufferings, we hoped oncemore. We had staked our salvation on this one last gamble.Despite the buzzing in my head, I soon could hear vibrations under theNautilus’s hull. We tilted. The ice cracked with an odd ripping sound,like paper tearing, and the Nautilus began settling downward.“We’re going through!” Conseil muttered in my ear.I couldn’t answer him. I clutched his hand. I squeezed it in aninvoluntary convulsion.All at once, carried away by its frightful excess load, the Nautilussank into the waters like a cannonball, in other words, dropping as ifin a vacuum!Our full electric power was then put on the pumps, which instantlybegan to expel water from the ballast tanks. After a few minutes wehad checked our fall. The pressure gauge soon indicated an ascendingmovement. Brought to full speed, the propeller made the sheet-ironhull tremble down to its rivets, and we sped northward.But how long would it take to navigate under the Ice Bank to the opensea? Another day? I would be dead first!Half lying on a couch in the library, I was suffocating. My face waspurple, my lips blue, my faculties in abeyance. I could no longer seeor hear. I had lost all sense of time. My muscles had no power tocontract.I’m unable to estimate the hours that passed in this way. But I wasaware that my death throes had begun. I realized that I was about todie . . .Suddenly I regained consciousness. A few whiffs of air had entered mylungs. Had we risen to the surface of the waves? Had we cleared theIce Bank?No! Ned and Conseil, my two gallant friends, were sacrificingthemselves to save me. A few atoms of air were still left in thedepths of one Rouquayrol device. Instead of breathing it themselves,they had saved it for me, and while they were suffocating, they pouredlife into me drop by drop! I tried to push the device away. They heldmy hands, and for a few moments I could breathe luxuriously.My eyes flew toward the clock. It was eleven in the morning. It had tobe March 28. The Nautilus was traveling at the frightful speed offorty miles per hour. It was writhing in the waters.Where was Captain Nemo? Had he perished? Had his companions died withhim?Just then the pressure gauge indicated we were no more than twentyfeet from the surface. Separating us from the open air was a meretract of ice. Could we break through it?Perhaps! In any event the Nautilus was going to try. In fact, I couldfeel it assuming an oblique position, lowering its stern and raisingits spur. The admission of additional water was enough to shift itsbalance. Then, driven by its powerful propeller, it attacked this icefield from below like a fearsome battering ram. It split the barrierlittle by little, backing up, then putting on full speed against thepunctured tract of ice; and finally, carried away by its suprememomentum, it lunged through and onto this frozen surface, crushing theice beneath its weight.The hatches were opened—or torn off, if you prefer—and waves of cleanair were admitted into every part of the Nautilus.CHAPTER 17From Cape Horn to the AmazonHOW I GOT ONTO the platform I’m unable to say. Perhaps the Canadiantransferred me there. But I could breathe, I could inhale thelife-giving sea air. Next to me my two companions were getting tipsyon the fresh oxygen particles. Poor souls who have suffered from longstarvation mustn’t pounce heedlessly on the first food given them. We,on the other hand, didn’t have to practice such moderation: we couldsuck the atoms from the air by the lungful, and it was the breeze, thebreeze itself, that poured into us this luxurious intoxication!“Ahhh!” Conseil was putting in. “What fine oxygen! Let master have nofears about breathing. There’s enough for everyone.”As for Ned Land, he didn’t say a word, but his wide-open jaws wouldhave scared off a shark. And what powerful inhalations! The Canadian“drew” like a furnace going full blast.Our strength returned promptly, and when I looked around, I saw thatwe were alone on the platform. No crewmen. Not even CaptainNemo. Those strange seamen on the Nautilus were content with theoxygen circulating inside. Not one of them had come up to enjoy theopen air.The first words I pronounced were words of appreciation and gratitudeto my two companions. Ned and Conseil had kept me alive during thefinal hours of our long death throes. But no expression of thankscould repay them fully for such devotion.“Good lord, professor,” Ned Land answered me, “don’t mention it! Whatdid we do that’s so praiseworthy? Not a thing. It was a question ofsimple arithmetic. Your life is worth more than ours. So we had tosave it.”“No, Ned,” I replied, “it isn’t worth more. Nobody could be betterthan a kind and generous man like yourself!”“All right, all right!” the Canadian repeated in embarrassment.“And you, my gallant Conseil, you suffered a great deal.”“Not too much, to be candid with master. I was lacking a fewthroatfuls of air, but I would have gotten by. Besides, when I sawmaster fainting, it left me without the slightest desire tobreathe. It took my breath away, in a manner of . . .”Confounded by this lapse into banality, Conseil left his sentencehanging.“My friends,” I replied, very moved, “we’re bound to each otherforever, and I’m deeply indebted to you—”“Which I’ll take advantage of,” the Canadian shot back.“Eh?” Conseil put in.“Yes,” Ned Land went on. “You can repay your debt by coming with mewhen I leave this infernal Nautilus.”“By the way,” Conseil said, “are we going in a favorable direction?”“Yes,” I replied, “because we’re going in the direction of the sun,and here the sun is due north.”“Sure,” Ned Land went on, “but it remains to be seen whether we’llmake for the Atlantic or the Pacific, in other words, whether we’llend up in well-traveled or deserted seas.”I had no reply to this, and I feared that Captain Nemo wouldn’t takeus homeward but rather into that huge ocean washing the shores of bothAsia and America. In this way he would complete his underwater tour ofthe world, going back to those seas where the Nautilus enjoyed thegreatest freedom. But if we returned to the Pacific, far from everypopulated shore, what would happen to Ned Land’s plans?We would soon settle this important point. The Nautilus traveledswiftly. Soon we had cleared the Antarctic Circle plus the promontoryof Cape Horn. We were abreast of the tip of South America by March 31at seven o’clock in the evening.By then all our past sufferings were forgotten. The memory of thatimprisonment under the ice faded from our minds. We had thoughts onlyof the future. Captain Nemo no longer appeared, neither in the loungenor on the platform. The positions reported each day on the world mapwere put there by the chief officer, and they enabled me to determinethe Nautilus’s exact heading. Now then, that evening it becameobvious, much to my satisfaction, that we were returning north by theAtlantic route.I shared the results of my observations with the Canadian and Conseil.“That’s good news,” the Canadian replied, “but where’s the Nautilusgoing?”“I’m unable to say, Ned.”“After the South Pole, does our captain want to tackle the North Pole,then go back to the Pacific by the notorious Northwest Passage?”“I wouldn’t double dare him,” Conseil replied.“Oh well,” the Canadian said, “we’ll give him the slip long beforethen.”“In any event,” Conseil added, “he’s a superman, that Captain Nemo,and we’ll never regret having known him.”“Especially once we’ve left him,” Ned Land shot back.The next day, April 1, when the Nautilus rose to the surface of thewaves a few minutes before noon, we raised land to the west. It wasTierra del Fuego, the Land of Fire, a name given it by earlynavigators after they saw numerous curls of smoke rising from thenatives’ huts. This Land of Fire forms a huge cluster of islands overthirty leagues long and eighty leagues wide, extending betweenlatitude 53 degrees and 56 degrees south, and between longitude 67degrees 50’ and 77 degrees 15’ west. Its coastline looked flat, buthigh mountains rose in the distance. I even thought I glimpsedMt. Sarmiento, whose elevation is 2,070 meters above sea level: apyramid-shaped block of shale with a very sharp summit, which,depending on whether it’s clear or veiled in vapor, “predicts fairweather or foul,” as Ned Land told me.“A first-class barometer, my friend.”“Yes, sir, a natural barometer that didn’t let me down when Inavigated the narrows of the Strait of Magellan.”Just then its peak appeared before us, standing out distinctly againstthe background of the skies. This forecast fair weather. And so itproved.Going back under the waters, the Nautilus drew near the coast,cruising along it for only a few miles. Through the lounge windows Icould see long creepers and gigantic fucus plants, bulb-bearingseaweed of which the open sea at the pole had revealed a fewspecimens; with their smooth, viscous filaments, they measured as muchas 300 meters long; genuine cables more than an inch thick and verytough, they’re often used as mooring lines for ships. Another weed,known by the name velp and boasting four-foot leaves, was crammed intothe coral concretions and carpeted the ocean floor. It served as bothnest and nourishment for myriads of crustaceans and mollusks, forcrabs and cuttlefish. Here seals and otters could indulge in asumptuous meal, mixing meat from fish with vegetables from the sea,like the English with their Irish stews.The Nautilus passed over these lush, luxuriant depths with tremendousspeed. Near evening it approached the Falkland Islands, whose ruggedsummits I recognized the next day. The sea was of moderate depth. Sonot without good reason, I assumed that these two islands, plus themany islets surrounding them, used to be part of the Magellancoastline. The Falkland Islands were probably discovered by the famousnavigator John Davis, who gave them the name Davis SouthernIslands. Later Sir Richard Hawkins called them the Maidenland, afterthe Blessed Virgin. Subsequently, at the beginning of the 18thcentury, they were named the Malouines by fishermen from Saint-Malo inBrittany, then finally dubbed the Falklands by the English, to whomthey belong today.In these waterways our nets brought up fine samples of algae, inparticular certain fucus plants whose roots were laden with theworld’s best mussels. Geese and duck alighted by the dozens on theplatform and soon took their places in the ship’s pantry. As for fish,I specifically observed some bony fish belonging to the goby genus,especially some gudgeon two decimeters long, sprinkled with whitishand yellow spots.I likewise marveled at the numerous medusas, including the mostbeautiful of their breed, the compass jellyfish, unique to theFalkland seas. Some of these jellyfish were shaped like very smooth,semispheric parasols with russet stripes and fringes of twelve neatfestoons. Others looked like upside-down baskets from which wideleaves and long red twigs were gracefully trailing. They swam withquiverings of their four leaflike arms, letting the opulent tresses oftheir tentacles dangle in the drift. I wanted to preserve a fewspecimens of these delicate zoophytes, but they were merely clouds,shadows, illusions, melting and evaporating outside their nativeelement.When the last tips of the Falkland Islands had disappeared below thehorizon, the Nautilus submerged to a depth between twenty andtwenty-five meters and went along the South American coast. CaptainNemo didn’t put in an appearance.We didn’t leave these Patagonian waterways until April 3, sometimescruising under the ocean, sometimes on its surface. The Nautiluspassed the wide estuary formed by the mouth of the Rio de la Plata,and on April 4 we lay abreast of Uruguay, albeit fifty milesout. Keeping to its northerly heading, it followed the long windingsof South America. By then we had fared 16,000 leagues since coming onboard in the seas of Japan.Near eleven o’clock in the morning, we cut the Tropic of Capricorn onthe 37th meridian, passing well out from Cape Frio. Much to Ned Land’sdispleasure, Captain Nemo had no liking for the neighborhood ofBrazil’s populous shores, because he shot by with dizzying speed. Noteven the swiftest fish or birds could keep up with us, and the naturalcuriosities in these seas completely eluded our observation.This speed was maintained for several days, and on the evening ofApril 9, we raised South America’s easternmost tip, Cape SãoRoque. But then the Nautilus veered away again and went looking forthe lowest depths of an underwater valley gouged between this cape andSierra Leone on the coast of Africa. Abreast of the West Indies, thisvalley forks into two arms, and to the north it ends in an enormousdepression 9,000 meters deep. From this locality to the LesserAntilles, the ocean’s geologic profile features a steeply cut cliffsix kilometers high, and abreast of the Cape Verde Islands, there’sanother wall just as imposing; together these two barricades confinethe whole submerged continent of Atlantis. The floor of this immensevalley is made picturesque by mountains that furnish these underwaterdepths with scenic views. This description is based mostly on certainhand-drawn charts kept in the Nautilus’s library, charts obviouslyrendered by Captain Nemo himself from his own personal observations.For two days we visited these deep and deserted waters by means of ourslanting fins. The Nautilus would do long, diagonal dives that took usto every level. But on April 11 it rose suddenly, and the shorereappeared at the mouth of the Amazon River, a huge estuary whoseoutflow is so considerable, it desalts the sea over an area of severalleagues.We cut the Equator. Twenty miles to the west lay Guiana, Frenchterritory where we could easily have taken refuge. But the wind wasblowing a strong gust, and the furious billows would not allow us toface them in a mere skiff. No doubt Ned Land understood this becausehe said nothing to me. For my part, I made no allusion to his escapeplans because I didn’t want to push him into an attempt that wascertain to misfire.I was readily compensated for this delay by fascinatingresearch. During those two days of April 11-12, the Nautilus didn’tleave the surface of the sea, and its trawl brought up a simplymiraculous catch of zoophytes, fish, and reptiles.Some zoophytes were dredged up by the chain of our trawl. Most werelovely sea anemone belonging to the family Actinidia, including amongother species, the Phyctalis protexta, native to this part of theocean: a small cylindrical trunk adorned with vertical lines, mottledwith red spots, and crowned by a wondrous blossoming of tentacles. Asfor mollusks, they consisted of exhibits I had already observed:turret snails, olive shells of the “tent olive” species with neatlyintersecting lines and russet spots standing out sharply against aflesh-colored background, fanciful spider conchs that looked likepetrified scorpions, transparent glass snails, argonauts, some highlyedible cuttlefish, and certain species of squid that the naturalistsof antiquity classified with the flying fish, which are used chieflyas bait for catching cod.As for the fish in these waterways, I noted various species that Ihadn’t yet had the opportunity to study. Among cartilaginous fish:some brook lamprey, a type of eel fifteen inches long, head greenish,fins violet, back bluish gray, belly a silvery brown strewn withbright spots, iris of the eye encircled in gold, unusual animals thatthe Amazon’s current must have swept out to sea because their naturalhabitat is fresh water; sting rays, the snout pointed, the tail long,slender, and armed with an extensive jagged sting; small one-metersharks with gray and whitish hides, their teeth arranged in severalbackward-curving rows, fish commonly known by the name carpet shark;batfish, a sort of reddish isosceles triangle half a meter long, whosepectoral fins are attached by fleshy extensions that make these fishlook like bats, although an appendage made of horn, located near thenostrils, earns them the nickname of sea unicorns; lastly, a couplespecies of triggerfish, the cucuyo whose stippled flanks glitter witha sparkling gold color, and the bright purple leatherjacket whose huesglisten like a pigeon’s throat.I’ll finish up this catalog, a little dry but quite accurate, with theseries of bony fish I observed: eels belonging to the genusApteronotus whose snow-white snout is very blunt, the body painted ahandsome black and armed with a very long, slender, fleshy whip; longsardines from the genus Odontognathus, like three-decimeter pike,shining with a bright silver glow; Guaranian mackerel furnished withtwo anal fins; black-tinted rudderfish that you catch by usingtorches, fish measuring two meters and boasting white, firm, plumpmeat that, when fresh, tastes like eel, when dried, like smokedsalmon; semired wrasse sporting scales only at the bases of theirdorsal and anal fins; grunts on which gold and silver mingle theirluster with that of ruby and topaz; yellow-tailed gilthead whose fleshis extremely dainty and whose phosphorescent properties give them awayin the midst of the waters; porgies tinted orange, with slendertongues; croakers with gold caudal fins; black surgeonfish; four-eyedfish from Surinam, etc.This “et cetera” won’t keep me from mentioning one more fish thatConseil, with good reason, will long remember.One of our nets had hauled up a type of very flat ray that weighedsome twenty kilograms; with its tail cut off, it would have formed aperfect disk. It was white underneath and reddish on top, with biground spots of deep blue encircled in black, its hide quite smooth andending in a double-lobed fin. Laid out on the platform, it keptstruggling with convulsive movements, trying to turn over, making suchefforts that its final lunge was about to flip it into the sea. ButConseil, being very possessive of his fish, rushed at it, and before Icould stop him, he seized it with both hands.Instantly there he was, thrown on his back, legs in the air, his bodyhalf paralyzed, and yelling:“Oh, sir, sir! Will you help me!”For once in his life, the poor lad didn’t address me “in the thirdperson.”The Canadian and I sat him up; we massaged his contracted arms, andwhen he regained his five senses, that eternal classifier mumbled in abroken voice:“Class of cartilaginous fish, order Chondropterygia with fixed gills,suborder Selacia, family Rajiiforma, genus electric ray.”“Yes, my friend,” I answered, “it was an electric ray that put you inthis deplorable state.”“Oh, master can trust me on this,” Conseil shot back. “I’ll berevenged on that animal!”“How?”“I’ll eat it.”Which he did that same evening, but strictly as retaliation. Because,frankly, it tasted like leather.Poor Conseil had assaulted an electric ray of the most dangerousspecies, the cumana. Living in a conducting medium such as water, thisbizarre animal can electrocute other fish from several meters away, sogreat is the power of its electric organ, an organ whose two chiefsurfaces measure at least twenty-seven square feet.During the course of the next day, April 12, the Nautilus drew nearthe coast of Dutch Guiana, by the mouth of the Maroni River. Thereseveral groups of sea cows were living in family units. These weremanatees, which belong to the order Sirenia, like the dugong andSteller’s sea cow. Harmless and unaggressive, these fine animals weresix to seven meters long and must have weighed at least 4,000kilograms each. I told Ned Land and Conseil that farseeing nature hadgiven these mammals a major role to play. In essence, manatees, likeseals, are designed to graze the underwater prairies, destroying theclusters of weeds that obstruct the mouths of tropical rivers.“And do you know,” I added, “what happened since man has almostcompletely wiped out these beneficial races? Rotting weeds havepoisoned the air, and this poisoned air causes the yellow fever thatdevastates these wonderful countries. This toxic vegetation hasincreased beneath the seas of the Torrid Zone, so the disease spreadsunchecked from the mouth of the Rio de la Plata to Florida!”And if Professor Toussenel is correct, this plague is nothing comparedto the scourge that will strike our descendants once the seas aredepopulated of whales and seals. By then, crowded with jellyfish,squid, and other devilfish, the oceans will have become huge centersof infection, because their waves will no longer possess “these hugestomachs that God has entrusted with scouring the surface of the sea.”Meanwhile, without scorning these theories, the Nautilus’s crewcaptured half a dozen manatees. In essence, it was an issue ofstocking the larder with excellent red meat, even better than beef orveal. Their hunting was not a fascinating sport. The manatees letthemselves be struck down without offering any resistance. Severalthousand kilos of meat were hauled below, to be dried and stored.The same day an odd fishing practice further increased the Nautilus’sstores, so full of game were these seas. Our trawl brought up in itsmeshes a number of fish whose heads were topped by little oval slabswith fleshy edges. These were suckerfish from the third family of thesubbrachian Malacopterygia. These flat disks on their heads consist ofcrosswise plates of movable cartilage, between which the animals cancreate a vacuum, enabling them to stick to objects like suction cups.The remoras I had observed in the Mediterranean were related to thisspecies. But the creature at issue here was an Echeneis osteochara,unique to this sea. Right after catching them, our seamen dropped themin buckets of water.Its fishing finished, the Nautilus drew nearer to the coast. In thislocality a number of sea turtles were sleeping on the surface of thewaves. It would have been difficult to capture these valuablereptiles, because they wake up at the slightest sound, and their solidcarapaces are harpoon-proof. But our suckerfish would effect theircapture with extraordinary certainty and precision. In truth, thisanimal is a living fishhook, promising wealth and happiness to thegreenest fisherman in the business.The Nautilus’s men attached to each fish’s tail a ring that was bigenough not to hamper its movements, and to this ring a long rope whoseother end was moored on board.Thrown into the sea, the suckerfish immediately began to play theirroles, going and fastening themselves onto the breastplates of theturtles. Their tenacity was so great, they would rip apart rather thanlet go. They were hauled in, still sticking to the turtles that cameaboard with them.In this way we caught several loggerheads, reptiles a meter wide andweighing 200 kilos. They’re extremely valuable because of theircarapaces, which are covered with big slabs of horn, thin, brown,transparent, with white and yellow markings. Besides, they wereexcellent from an edible viewpoint, with an exquisite flavorcomparable to the green turtle.This fishing ended our stay in the waterways of the Amazon, and thatevening the Nautilus took to the high seas once more.CHAPTER 18The DevilfishFOR SOME DAYS the Nautilus kept veering away from the Americancoast. It obviously didn’t want to frequent the waves of the Gulf ofMexico or the Caribbean Sea. Yet there was no shortage of water underits keel, since the average depth of these seas is 1,800 meters; butthese waterways, strewn with islands and plowed by steamers, probablydidn’t agree with Captain Nemo.On April 16 we raised Martinique and Guadalupe from a distance ofabout thirty miles. For one instant I could see their lofty peaks.The Canadian was quite disheartened, having counted on putting hisplans into execution in the gulf, either by reaching shore or bypulling alongside one of the many boats plying a coastal trade fromone island to another. An escape attempt would have been quitefeasible, assuming Ned Land managed to seize the skiff without thecaptain’s knowledge. But in midocean it was unthinkable.The Canadian, Conseil, and I had a pretty long conversation on thissubject. For six months we had been prisoners aboard the Nautilus. Wehad fared 17,000 leagues, and as Ned Land put it, there was no end insight. So he made me a proposition I hadn’t anticipated. We were toask Captain Nemo this question straight out: did the captain mean tokeep us on board his vessel permanently?This measure was distasteful to me. To my mind it would leadnowhere. We could hope for nothing from the Nautilus’s commander butcould depend only on ourselves. Besides, for some time now the man hadbeen gloomier, more withdrawn, less sociable. He seemed to be avoidingme. I encountered him only at rare intervals. He used to take pleasurein explaining the underwater wonders to me; now he left me to myresearch and no longer entered the lounge.What changes had come over him? From what cause? I had no reason toblame myself. Was our presence on board perhaps a burden to him? Evenso, I cherished no hopes that the man would set us free.So I begged Ned to let me think about it before taking action. If thismeasure proved fruitless, it could arouse the captain’s suspicions,make our circumstances even more arduous, and jeopardize theCanadian’s plans. I might add that I could hardly use our state ofhealth as an argument. Except for that grueling ordeal under the IceBank at the South Pole, we had never felt better, neither Ned,Conseil, nor I. The nutritious food, life-giving air, regular routine,and uniform temperature kept illness at bay; and for a man who didn’tmiss his past existence on land, for a Captain Nemo who was at homehere, who went where he wished, who took paths mysterious to others ifnot himself in attaining his ends, I could understand such a life. Butwe ourselves hadn’t severed all ties with humanity. For my part, Ididn’t want my new and unusual research to be buried with my bones. Ihad now earned the right to pen the definitive book on the sea, andsooner or later I wanted that book to see the light of day.There once more, through the panels opening into these Caribbeanwaters ten meters below the surface of the waves, I found so manyfascinating exhibits to describe in my daily notes! Among otherzoophytes there were Portuguese men-of-war known by the name Physaliapelagica, like big, oblong bladders with a pearly sheen, spreadingtheir membranes to the wind, letting their blue tentacles drift likesilken threads; to the eye delightful jellyfish, to the touch actualnettles that ooze a corrosive liquid. Among the articulates there wereannelid worms one and a half meters long, furnished with a pinkproboscis, equipped with 1,700 organs of locomotion, snaking throughthe waters, and as they went, throwing off every gleam in the solarspectrum. From the fish branch there were manta rays, enormouscartilaginous fish ten feet long and weighing 600 pounds, theirpectoral fin triangular, their midback slightly arched, their eyesattached to the edges of the face at the front of the head; theyfloated like wreckage from a ship, sometimes fastening onto ourwindows like opaque shutters. There were American triggerfish forwhich nature has ground only black and white pigments, feather-shapedgobies that were long and plump with yellow fins and jutting jaws,sixteen-decimeter mackerel with short, sharp teeth, covered with smallscales, and related to the albacore species. Next came swarms of redmullet corseted in gold stripes from head to tail, their shining finsall aquiver, genuine masterpieces of jewelry, formerly sacred to thegoddess Diana, much in demand by rich Romans, and about which the oldsaying goes: “He who catches them doesn’t eat them!” Finally, adornedwith emerald ribbons and dressed in velvet and silk, golden angelfishpassed before our eyes like courtiers in the paintings of Veronese;spurred gilthead stole by with their swift thoracic fins; threadherring fifteen inches long were wrapped in their phosphorescentglimmers; gray mullet thrashed the sea with their big fleshy tails;red salmon seemed to mow the waves with their slicing pectorals; andsilver moonfish, worthy of their name, rose on the horizon of thewaters like the whitish reflections of many moons.How many other marvelous new specimens I still could have observed if,little by little, the Nautilus hadn’t settled to the lower strata! Itsslanting fins drew it to depths of 2,000 and 3,500 meters. Thereanimal life was represented by nothing more than sea lilies, starfish,delightful crinoids with bell-shaped heads like little chalices onstraight stems, top-shell snails, blood-red tooth shells, andfissurella snails, a large species of coastal mollusk.By April 20 we had risen to an average level of 1,500 meters. Thenearest land was the island group of the Bahamas, scattered like abatch of cobblestones over the surface of the water. There highunderwater cliffs reared up, straight walls made of craggy chunksarranged like big stone foundations, among which there gaped blackcaves so deep our electric rays couldn’t light them to the far ends.These rocks were hung with huge weeds, immense sea tangle, giganticfucus—a genuine trellis of water plants fit for a world of giants.In discussing these colossal plants, Conseil, Ned, and I werenaturally led into mentioning the sea’s gigantic animals. The formerwere obviously meant to feed the latter. However, through the windowsof our almost motionless Nautilus, I could see nothing among theselong filaments other than the chief articulates of the divisionBrachyura: long-legged spider crabs, violet crabs, and sponge crabsunique to the waters of the Caribbean.It was about eleven o’clock when Ned Land drew my attention to afearsome commotion out in this huge seaweed.“Well,” I said, “these are real devilfish caverns, and I wouldn’t besurprised to see some of those monsters hereabouts.”“What!” Conseil put in. “Squid, ordinary squid from the classCephalopoda?”“No,” I said, “devilfish of large dimensions. But friend Land is nodoubt mistaken, because I don’t see a thing.”“That’s regrettable,” Conseil answered. “I’d like to come face to facewith one of those devilfish I’ve heard so much about, which can dragships down into the depths. Those beasts go by the name of krake—”“Fake is more like it,” the Canadian replied sarcastically.“Krakens!” Conseil shot back, finishing his word without wincing athis companion’s witticism.“Nobody will ever make me believe,” Ned Land said, “that such animalsexist.”“Why not?” Conseil replied. “We sincerely believed in master’snarwhale.”“We were wrong, Conseil.”“No doubt, but there are others with no doubts who believe to thisday!”“Probably, Conseil. But as for me, I’m bound and determined not toaccept the existence of any such monster till I’ve dissected it withmy own two hands.”“Yet,” Conseil asked me, “doesn’t master believe in giganticdevilfish?”“Yikes! Who in Hades ever believed in them?” the Canadian exclaimed.“Many people, Ned my friend,” I said.“No fishermen. Scientists maybe!”“Pardon me, Ned. Fishermen and scientists!”“Why, I to whom you speak,” Conseil said with the world’s straightestface, “I recall perfectly seeing a large boat dragged under the wavesby the arms of a cephalopod.”“You saw that?” the Canadian asked.“Yes, Ned.”“With your own two eyes?”“With my own two eyes.”“Where, may I ask?”“In Saint-Malo,” Conseil returned unflappably.“In the harbor?” Ned Land said sarcastically.“No, in a church,” Conseil replied.“In a church!” the Canadian exclaimed.“Yes, Ned my friend. It had a picture that portrayed the devilfish inquestion.”“Oh good!” Ned Land exclaimed with a burst of laughter. “Mr. Conseilput one over on me!”“Actually he’s right,” I said. “I’ve heard about that picture. But thesubject it portrays is taken from a legend, and you know how to ratelegends in matters of natural history! Besides, when it’s an issue ofmonsters, the human imagination always tends to run wild. People notonly claimed these devilfish could drag ships under, but a certainOlaus Magnus tells of a cephalopod a mile long that looked more likean island than an animal. There’s also the story of how the Bishop ofTrondheim set up an altar one day on an immense rock. After hefinished saying mass, this rock started moving and went back into thesea. The rock was a devilfish.”“And that’s everything we know?” the Canadian asked.“No,” I replied, “another bishop, Pontoppidan of Bergen, also tells ofa devilfish so large a whole cavalry regiment could maneuver on it.”“They sure did go on, those oldtime bishops!” Ned Land said.“Finally, the naturalists of antiquity mention some monsters withmouths as big as a gulf, which were too huge to get through the Straitof Gibraltar.”“Good work, men!” the Canadian put in.“But in all these stories, is there any truth?” Conseil asked.“None at all, my friends, at least in those that go beyond the boundsof credibility and fly off into fable or legend. Yet for theimaginings of these storytellers there had to be, if not a cause, atleast an excuse. It can’t be denied that some species of squid andother devilfish are quite large, though still smaller thancetaceans. Aristotle put the dimensions of one squid at five cubits,or 3.1 meters. Our fishermen frequently see specimens over 1.8 meterslong. The museums in Trieste and Montpellier have preserved somedevilfish carcasses measuring two meters. Besides, according to thecalculations of naturalists, one of these animals only six feet longwould have tentacles as long as twenty-seven. Which is enough to makea fearsome monster.”“Does anybody fish for ’em nowadays?” the Canadian asked.“If they don’t fish for them, sailors at least sight them. A friend ofmine, Captain Paul Bos of Le Havre, has often sworn to me that heencountered one of these monsters of colossal size in the seas of theEast Indies. But the most astonishing event, which proves that thesegigantic animals undeniably exist, took place a few years ago in1861.”“What event was that?” Ned Land asked.“Just this. In 1861, to the northeast of Tenerife and fairly near thelatitude where we are right now, the crew of the gunboat Alectospotted a monstrous squid swimming in their waters. Commander Bouguerapproached the animal and attacked it with blows from harpoons andblasts from rifles, but without much success because bullets andharpoons crossed its soft flesh as if it were semiliquid jelly. Afterseveral fruitless attempts, the crew managed to slip a noose aroundthe mollusk’s body. This noose slid as far as the caudal fins and cameto a halt. Then they tried to haul the monster on board, but itsweight was so considerable that when they tugged on the rope, theanimal parted company with its tail; and deprived of this adornment,it disappeared beneath the waters.”“Finally, an actual event,” Ned Land said.“An indisputable event, my gallant Ned. Accordingly, people haveproposed naming this devilfish Bouguer’s Squid.”“And how long was it?” the Canadian asked.“Didn’t it measure about six meters?” said Conseil, who was stationedat the window and examining anew the crevices in the cliff.“Precisely,” I replied.“Wasn’t its head,” Conseil went on, “crowned by eight tentacles thatquivered in the water like a nest of snakes?”“Precisely.”“Weren’t its eyes prominently placed and considerably enlarged?”“Yes, Conseil.”“And wasn’t its mouth a real parrot’s beak but of fearsome size?”“Correct, Conseil.”“Well, with all due respect to master,” Conseil replied serenely, “ifthis isn’t Bouguer’s Squid, it’s at least one of his close relatives!”I stared at Conseil. Ned Land rushed to the window.“What an awful animal!” he exclaimed.I stared in my turn and couldn’t keep back a movement ofrevulsion. Before my eyes there quivered a horrible monster worthy ofa place among the most farfetched teratological legends.It was a squid of colossal dimensions, fully eight meters long. It wastraveling backward with tremendous speed in the same direction as theNautilus. It gazed with enormous, staring eyes that were tinted seagreen. Its eight arms (or more accurately, feet) were rooted in itshead, which has earned these animals the name cephalopod; its armsstretched a distance twice the length of its body and were writhinglike the serpentine hair of the Furies. You could plainly see its 250suckers, arranged over the inner sides of its tentacles and shapedlike semispheric capsules. Sometimes these suckers fastened onto thelounge window by creating vacuums against it. The monster’s mouth—abeak made of horn and shaped like that of a parrot—opened and closedvertically. Its tongue, also of horn substance and armed with severalrows of sharp teeth, would flicker out from between these genuineshears. What a freak of nature! A bird’s beak on a mollusk! Its bodywas spindle-shaped and swollen in the middle, a fleshy mass that musthave weighed 20,000 to 25,000 kilograms. Its unstable color wouldchange with tremendous speed as the animal grew irritated, passingsuccessively from bluish gray to reddish brown.What was irritating this mollusk? No doubt the presence of theNautilus, even more fearsome than itself, and which it couldn’t gripwith its mandibles or the suckers on its arms. And yet what monstersthese devilfish are, what vitality our Creator has given them, whatvigor in their movements, thanks to their owning a triple heart!Sheer chance had placed us in the presence of this squid, and I didn’twant to lose this opportunity to meticulously study such a cephalopodspecimen. I overcame the horror that its appearance inspired in me,picked up a pencil, and began to sketch it.“Perhaps this is the same as the Alecto’s,” Conseil said.“Can’t be,” the Canadian replied, “because this one’s complete whilethe other one lost its tail!”“That doesn’t necessarily follow,” I said. “The arms and tails ofthese animals grow back through regeneration, and in seven years thetail on Bouguer’s Squid has surely had time to sprout again.”“Anyhow,” Ned shot back, “if it isn’t this fellow, maybe it’s one ofthose!”Indeed, other devilfish had appeared at the starboard window. Icounted seven of them. They provided the Nautilus with an escort, andI could hear their beaks gnashing on the sheet-iron hull. We couldn’thave asked for a more devoted following.I continued sketching. These monsters kept pace in our waters withsuch precision, they seemed to be standing still, and I could havetraced their outlines in miniature on the window. But we were movingat a moderate speed.All at once the Nautilus stopped. A jolt made it tremble through itsentire framework.“Did we strike bottom?” I asked.“In any event we’re already clear,” the Canadian replied, “becausewe’re afloat.”The Nautilus was certainly afloat, but it was no longer in motion. Theblades of its propeller weren’t churning the waves. A minutepassed. Followed by his chief officer, Captain Nemo entered thelounge.I hadn’t seen him for a good while. He looked gloomy to me. Withoutspeaking to us, without even seeing us perhaps, he went to the panel,stared at the devilfish, and said a few words to his chief officer.The latter went out. Soon the panels closed. The ceiling lit up.I went over to the captain.“An unusual assortment of devilfish,” I told him, as carefree as acollector in front of an aquarium.“Correct, Mr. Naturalist,” he answered me, “and we’re going to fightthem at close quarters.”I gaped at the captain. I thought my hearing had gone bad.“At close quarters?” I repeated.“Yes, sir. Our propeller is jammed. I think the horn-covered mandiblesof one of these squid are entangled in the blades. That’s why wearen’t moving.”“And what are you going to do?”“Rise to the surface and slaughter the vermin.”“A difficult undertaking.”“Correct. Our electric bullets are ineffective against such softflesh, where they don’t meet enough resistance to go off. But we’llattack the beasts with axes.”“And harpoons, sir,” the Canadian said, “if you don’t turn down myhelp.”“I accept it, Mr. Land.”“We’ll go with you,” I said. And we followed Captain Nemo, heading tothe central companionway.There some ten men were standing by for the assault, armed withboarding axes. Conseil and I picked up two more axes. Ned Land seizeda harpoon.By then the Nautilus had returned to the surface of thewaves. Stationed on the top steps, one of the seamen undid the boltsof the hatch. But he had scarcely unscrewed the nuts when the hatchflew up with tremendous violence, obviously pulled open by the suckerson a devilfish’s arm.Instantly one of those long arms glided like a snake into the opening,and twenty others were quivering above. With a sweep of the ax,Captain Nemo chopped off this fearsome tentacle, which slid writhingdown the steps.Just as we were crowding each other to reach the platform, two morearms lashed the air, swooped on the seaman stationed in front ofCaptain Nemo, and carried the fellow away with irresistible violence.Captain Nemo gave a shout and leaped outside. We rushed after him.What a scene! Seized by the tentacle and glued to its suckers, theunfortunate man was swinging in the air at the mercy of this enormousappendage. He gasped, he choked, he yelled: “Help! Help!” These words,pronounced in French, left me deeply stunned! So I had a fellowcountryman on board, perhaps several! I’ll hear his harrowing plea therest of my life!The poor fellow was done for. Who could tear him from such a powerfulgrip? Even so, Captain Nemo rushed at the devilfish and with a sweepof the ax hewed one more of its arms. His chief officer struggledfuriously with other monsters crawling up the Nautilus’s sides. Thecrew battled with flailing axes. The Canadian, Conseil, and I sank ourweapons into these fleshy masses. An intense, musky odor filled theair. It was horrible.For an instant I thought the poor man entwined by the devilfish mightbe torn loose from its powerful suction. Seven arms out of eight hadbeen chopped off. Brandishing its victim like a feather, one lonetentacle was writhing in the air. But just as Captain Nemo and hischief officer rushed at it, the animal shot off a spout of blackishliquid, secreted by a pouch located in its abdomen. It blindedus. When this cloud had dispersed, the squid was gone, and so was mypoor fellow countryman!What rage then drove us against these monsters! We lost allself-control. Ten or twelve devilfish had overrun the Nautilus’splatform and sides. We piled helter-skelter into the thick of thesesawed-off snakes, which darted over the platform amid waves of bloodand sepia ink. It seemed as if these viscous tentacles grew back likethe many heads of Hydra. At every thrust Ned Land’s harpoon wouldplunge into a squid’s sea-green eye and burst it. But my daringcompanion was suddenly toppled by the tentacles of a monster he couldnot avoid.Oh, my heart nearly exploded with excitement and horror! The squid’sfearsome beak was wide open over Ned Land. The poor man was about tobe cut in half. I ran to his rescue. But Captain Nemo got therefirst. His ax disappeared between the two enormous mandibles, and theCanadian, miraculously saved, stood and plunged his harpoon all theway into the devilfish’s triple heart.“Tit for tat,” Captain Nemo told the Canadian. “I owed it to myself!”Ned bowed without answering him.This struggle had lasted a quarter of an hour. Defeated, mutilated,battered to death, the monsters finally yielded to us and disappearedbeneath the waves.Red with blood, motionless by the beacon, Captain Nemo stared at thesea that had swallowed one of his companions, and large tears streamedfrom his eyes.CHAPTER 19The Gulf StreamTHIS DREADFUL SCENE on April 20 none of us will ever be able toforget. I wrote it up in a state of intense excitement. Later Ireviewed my narrative. I read it to Conseil and the Canadian. Theyfound it accurate in detail but deficient in impact. To convey suchsights, it would take the pen of our most famous poet, Victor Hugo,author of The Toilers of the Sea.As I said, Captain Nemo wept while staring at the waves. His grief wasimmense. This was the second companion he had lost since we had comeaboard. And what a way to die! Smashed, strangled, crushed by thefearsome arms of a devilfish, ground between its iron mandibles, thisfriend would never rest with his companions in the placid waters oftheir coral cemetery!As for me, what had harrowed my heart in the thick of this strugglewas the despairing yell given by this unfortunate man. Forgetting hisregulation language, this poor Frenchman had reverted to speaking hisown mother tongue to fling out one supreme plea! Among the Nautilus’screw, allied body and soul with Captain Nemo and likewise fleeing fromhuman contact, I had found a fellow countryman! Was he the onlyrepresentative of France in this mysterious alliance, obviously madeup of individuals from different nationalities? This was just one moreof those insoluble problems that kept welling up in my mind!Captain Nemo reentered his stateroom, and I saw no more of him for agood while. But how sad, despairing, and irresolute he must have felt,to judge from this ship whose soul he was, which reflected his everymood! The Nautilus no longer kept to a fixed heading. It drifted backand forth, riding with the waves like a corpse. Its propeller had beendisentangled but was barely put to use. It was navigating atrandom. It couldn’t tear itself away from the setting of this laststruggle, from this sea that had devoured one of its own!Ten days went by in this way. It was only on May 1 that the Nautilusopenly resumed its northbound course, after raising the Bahamas at themouth of Old Bahama Channel. We then went with the current of thesea’s greatest river, which has its own banks, fish, andtemperature. I mean the Gulf Stream.It is indeed a river that runs independently through the middle of theAtlantic, its waters never mixing with the ocean’s waters. It’s asalty river, saltier than the sea surrounding it. Its average depth is3,000 feet, its average width sixty miles. In certain localities itscurrent moves at a speed of four kilometers per hour. The unchangingvolume of its waters is greater than that of all the world’s riverscombined.As discovered by Commander Maury, the true source of the Gulf Stream,its starting point, if you prefer, is located in the Bay ofBiscay. There its waters, still weak in temperature and color, beginto form. It goes down south, skirts equatorial Africa, warms its wavesin the rays of the Torrid Zone, crosses the Atlantic, reaches Cape SãoRoque on the coast of Brazil, and forks into two branches, one goingto the Caribbean Sea for further saturation with heat particles. Then,entrusted with restoring the balance between hot and cold temperaturesand with mixing tropical and northern waters, the Gulf Stream beginsto play its stabilizing role. Attaining a white heat in the Gulf ofMexico, it heads north up the American coast, advances as far asNewfoundland, swerves away under the thrust of a cold current from theDavis Strait, and resumes its ocean course by going along a greatcircle of the earth on a rhumb line; it then divides into two armsnear the 43rd parallel; one, helped by the northeast trade winds,returns to the Bay of Biscay and the Azores; the other washes theshores of Ireland and Norway with lukewarm water, goes beyondSpitzbergen, where its temperature falls to 4 degrees centigrade, andfashions the open sea at the pole.It was on this oceanic river that the Nautilus was thennavigating. Leaving Old Bahama Channel, which is fourteen leagues wideby 350 meters deep, the Gulf Stream moves at the rate of eightkilometers per hour. Its speed steadily decreases as it advancesnorthward, and we must pray that this steadiness continues, because,as experts agree, if its speed and direction were to change, theclimates of Europe would undergo disturbances whose consequences areincalculable.Near noon I was on the platform with Conseil. I shared with him therelevant details on the Gulf Stream. When my explanation was over, Iinvited him to dip his hands into its current.Conseil did so, and he was quite astonished to experience no sensationof either hot or cold.“That comes,” I told him, “from the water temperature of the GulfStream, which, as it leaves the Gulf of Mexico, is barely differentfrom your blood temperature. This Gulf Stream is a huge heat generatorthat enables the coasts of Europe to be decked in eternalgreenery. And if Commander Maury is correct, were one to harness thefull warmth of this current, it would supply enough heat to keepmolten a river of iron solder as big as the Amazon or the Missouri.”Just then the Gulf Stream’s speed was 2.25 meters per second. Sodistinct is its current from the surrounding sea, its confined watersstand out against the ocean and operate on a different level from thecolder waters. Murky as well, and very rich in saline material, theirpure indigo contrasts with the green waves surrounding them. Moreover,their line of demarcation is so clear that abreast of the Carolinas,the Nautilus’s spur cut the waves of the Gulf Stream while itspropeller was still churning those belonging to the ocean.This current swept along with it a whole host of movingcreatures. Argonauts, so common in the Mediterranean, voyaged here inschools of large numbers. Among cartilaginous fish, the mostremarkable were rays whose ultra slender tails made up nearly a thirdof the body, which was shaped like a huge diamond twenty-five feetlong; then little one-meter sharks, the head large, the snout shortand rounded, the teeth sharp and arranged in several rows, the bodyseemingly covered with scales.Among bony fish, I noted grizzled wrasse unique to these seas,deep-water gilthead whose iris has a fiery gleam, one-meter croakerswhose large mouths bristle with small teeth and which let out thincries, black rudderfish like those I’ve already discussed, bluedorados accented with gold and silver, rainbow-hued parrotfish thatcan rival the loveliest tropical birds in coloring, banded blennieswith triangular heads, bluish flounder without scales, toadfishcovered with a crosswise yellow band in the shape of a Greek t, swarmsof little freckled gobies stippled with brown spots, lungfish withsilver heads and yellow tails, various specimens of salmon, mulletwith slim figures and a softly glowing radiance that Lacépèdededicated to the memory of his wife, and finally the American cavalla,a handsome fish decorated by every honorary order, bedizened withtheir every ribbon, frequenting the shores of this great nation whereribbons and orders are held in such low esteem.I might add that during the night, the Gulf Stream’s phosphorescentwaters rivaled the electric glow of our beacon, especially in thestormy weather that frequently threatened us.On May 8, while abreast of North Carolina, we were across from CapeHatteras once more. There the Gulf Stream is seventy-five miles wideand 210 meters deep. The Nautilus continued to wander atrandom. Seemingly, all supervision had been jettisoned. Under theseconditions I admit that we could easily have gotten away. In fact, thepopulous shores offered ready refuge everywhere. The sea was plowedcontinuously by the many steamers providing service between the Gulfof Mexico and New York or Boston, and it was crossed night and day bylittle schooners engaged in coastal trade over various points on theAmerican shore. We could hope to be picked up. So it was a promisingopportunity, despite the thirty miles that separated the Nautilus fromthese Union coasts.But one distressing circumstance totally thwarted the Canadian’splans. The weather was thoroughly foul. We were approaching waterwayswhere storms are commonplace, the very homeland of tornadoes andcyclones specifically engendered by the Gulf Stream’s current. To facea frequently raging sea in a frail skiff was a race to certaindisaster. Ned Land conceded this himself. So he champed at the bit, inthe grip of an intense homesickness that could be cured only by ourescape.“Sir,” he told me that day, “it’s got to stop. I want to get to thebottom of this. Your Nemo’s veering away from shore and heading upnorth. But believe you me, I had my fill at the South Pole and I’m notgoing with him to the North Pole.”“What can we do, Ned, since it isn’t feasible to escape right now?”“I keep coming back to my idea. We’ve got to talk to the captain. Whenwe were in your own country’s seas, you didn’t say a word. Now thatwe’re in mine, I intend to speak up. Before a few days are out, Ifigure the Nautilus will lie abreast of Nova Scotia, and from there toNewfoundland is the mouth of a large gulf, and the St. Lawrenceempties into that gulf, and the St. Lawrence is my own river, theriver running by Quebec, my hometown—and when I think about all this,my gorge rises and my hair stands on end! Honestly, sir, I’d ratherjump overboard! I can’t stay here any longer! I’m suffocating!”The Canadian was obviously at the end of his patience. His vigorousnature couldn’t adapt to this protracted imprisonment. His facialappearance was changing by the day. His moods grew gloomier andgloomier. I had a sense of what he was suffering because I also wasgripped by homesickness. Nearly seven months had gone by without ourhaving any news from shore. Moreover, Captain Nemo’s reclusiveness,his changed disposition, and especially his total silence since thebattle with the devilfish all made me see things in a differentlight. I no longer felt the enthusiasm of our first days on board. Youneeded to be Flemish like Conseil to accept these circumstances,living in a habitat designed for cetaceans and other denizens of thedeep. Truly, if that gallant lad had owned gills instead of lungs, Ithink he would have made an outstanding fish!“Well, sir?” Ned Land went on, seeing that I hadn’t replied.“Well, Ned, you want me to ask Captain Nemo what he intends to do withus?”“Yes, sir.”“Even though he has already made that clear?”“Yes. I want it settled once and for all. Speak just for me, strictlyon my behalf, if you want.”“But I rarely encounter him. He positively avoids me.”“All the more reason you should go look him up.”“I’ll confer with him, Ned.”“When?” the Canadian asked insistently.“When I encounter him.”“Professor Aronnax, would you like me to go find him myself?”“No, let me do it. Tomorrow—”“Today,” Ned Land said.“So be it. I’ll see him today,” I answered the Canadian, who, if hetook action himself, would certainly have ruined everything.I was left to myself. His request granted, I decided to dispose of itimmediately. I like things over and done with.I reentered my stateroom. From there I could hear movements insideCaptain Nemo’s quarters. I couldn’t pass up this chance for anencounter. I knocked on his door. I received no reply. I knockedagain, then tried the knob. The door opened.I entered. The captain was there. He was bending over his worktableand hadn’t heard me. Determined not to leave without questioning him,I drew closer. He looked up sharply, with a frowning brow, and said ina pretty stern tone:“Oh, it’s you! What do you want?”“To speak with you, captain.”“But I’m busy, sir, I’m at work. I give you the freedom to enjoy yourprivacy, can’t I have the same for myself?”This reception was less than encouraging. But I was determined to giveas good as I got.“Sir,” I said coolly, “I need to speak with you on a matter thatsimply can’t wait.”“Whatever could that be, sir?” he replied sarcastically. “Have youmade some discovery that has escaped me? Has the sea yielded up somenovel secret to you?”We were miles apart. But before I could reply, he showed me amanuscript open on the table and told me in a more serious tone:“Here, Professor Aronnax, is a manuscript written in severallanguages. It contains a summary of my research under the sea, and Godwilling, it won’t perish with me. Signed with my name, complete withmy life story, this manuscript will be enclosed in a small, unsinkablecontrivance. The last surviving man on the Nautilus will throw thiscontrivance into the sea, and it will go wherever the waves carry it.”The man’s name! His life story written by himself! So the secret ofhis existence might someday be unveiled? But just then I saw thisannouncement only as a lead-in to my topic.“Captain,” I replied, “I’m all praise for this idea you’re puttinginto effect. The fruits of your research must not be lost. But themethods you’re using strike me as primitive. Who knows where the windswill take that contrivance, into whose hands it may fall? Can’t youfind something better? Can’t you or one of your men—”“Never, sir,” the captain said, swiftly interrupting me.“But my companions and I would be willing to safeguard thismanuscript, and if you give us back our freedom—”“Your freedom!” Captain Nemo put in, standing up.“Yes, sir, and that’s the subject on which I wanted to confer withyou. For seven months we’ve been aboard your vessel, and I ask youtoday, in the name of my companions as well as myself, if you intendto keep us here forever.”“Professor Aronnax,” Captain Nemo said, “I’ll answer you today just asI did seven months ago: whoever boards the Nautilus must never leaveit.”“What you’re inflicting on us is outright slavery!”“Call it anything you like.”“But every slave has the right to recover his freedom! By anyworthwhile, available means!”“Who has denied you that right?” Captain Nemo replied. “Did I ever tryto bind you with your word of honor?”The captain stared at me, crossing his arms.“Sir,” I told him, “to take up this subject a second time would bedistasteful to both of us. So let’s finish what we’ve started. Irepeat: it isn’t just for myself that I raise this issue. To me,research is a relief, a potent diversion, an enticement, a passionthat can make me forget everything else. Like you, I’m a man neglectedand unknown, living in the faint hope that someday I can pass on tofuture generations the fruits of my labors—figuratively speaking, bymeans of some contrivance left to the luck of winds and waves. Inshort, I can admire you and comfortably go with you while playing arole I only partly understand; but I still catch glimpses of otheraspects of your life that are surrounded by involvements and secretsthat, alone on board, my companions and I can’t share. And even whenour hearts could beat with yours, moved by some of your griefs orstirred by your deeds of courage and genius, we’ve had to stifle eventhe slightest token of that sympathy that arises at the sight ofsomething fine and good, whether it comes from friend or enemy. Allright then! It’s this feeling of being alien to your deepest concernsthat makes our situation unacceptable, impossible, even impossible forme but especially for Ned Land. Every man, by virtue of his veryhumanity, deserves fair treatment. Have you considered how a love offreedom and hatred of slavery could lead to plans of vengeance in atemperament like the Canadian’s, what he might think, attempt,endeavor . . . ?”I fell silent. Captain Nemo stood up.“Ned Land can think, attempt, or endeavor anything he wants, whatdifference is it to me? I didn’t go looking for him! I don’t keep himon board for my pleasure! As for you, Professor Aronnax, you’re a manable to understand anything, even silence. I have nothing more to sayto you. Let this first time you’ve come to discuss this subject alsobe the last, because a second time I won’t even listen.”I withdrew. From that day forward our position was very strained. Ireported this conversation to my two companions.“Now we know,” Ned said, “that we can’t expect a thing from thisman. The Nautilus is nearing Long Island. We’ll escape, no matter whatthe weather.”But the skies became more and more threatening. There were conspicuoussigns of a hurricane on the way. The atmosphere was turning white andmilky. Slender sheaves of cirrus clouds were followed on the horizonby layers of nimbocumulus. Other low clouds fled swiftly. The sea grewtowering, inflated by long swells. Every bird had disappeared except afew petrels, friends of the storms. The barometer fell significantly,indicating a tremendous tension in the surrounding haze. The mixturein our stormglass decomposed under the influence of the electricitycharging the air. A struggle of the elements was approaching.The storm burst during the daytime of May 13, just as the Nautilus wascruising abreast of Long Island, a few miles from the narrows to UpperNew York Bay. I’m able to describe this struggle of the elementsbecause Captain Nemo didn’t flee into the ocean depths; instead, fromsome inexplicable whim, he decided to brave it out on the surface.The wind was blowing from the southwest, initially a stiff breeze, inother words, with a speed of fifteen meters per second, which built totwenty-five meters near three o’clock in the afternoon. This is thefigure for major storms.Unshaken by these squalls, Captain Nemo stationed himself on theplatform. He was lashed around the waist to withstand the monstrousbreakers foaming over the deck. I hoisted and attached myself to thesame place, dividing my wonderment between the storm and thisincomparable man who faced it head-on.The raging sea was swept with huge tattered clouds drenched by thewaves. I saw no more of the small intervening billows that form in thetroughs of the big crests. Just long, soot-colored undulations withcrests so compact they didn’t foam. They kept growing taller. Theywere spurring each other on. The Nautilus, sometimes lying on itsside, sometimes standing on end like a mast, rolled and pitchedfrightfully.Near five o’clock a torrential rain fell, but it lulled neither windnor sea. The hurricane was unleashed at a speed of forty-five metersper second, hence almost forty leagues per hour. Under theseconditions houses topple, roof tiles puncture doors, iron railingssnap in two, and twenty-four-pounder cannons relocate. And yet in themidst of this turmoil, the Nautilus lived up to that saying of anexpert engineer: “A well-constructed hull can defy any sea!” Thissubmersible was no resisting rock that waves could demolish; it was asteel spindle, obediently in motion, without rigging or masting, andable to brave their fury with impunity.Meanwhile I was carefully examining these unleashed breakers. Theymeasured up to fifteen meters in height over a length of 150 to 175meters, and the speed of their propagation (half that of the wind) wasfifteen meters per second. Their volume and power increased with thedepth of the waters. I then understood the role played by these waves,which trap air in their flanks and release it in the depths of the seawhere its oxygen brings life. Their utmost pressure—it has beencalculated—can build to 3,000 kilograms on every square foot ofsurface they strike. It was such waves in the Hebrides thatrepositioned a stone block weighing 84,000 pounds. It was theirrelatives in the tidal wave on December 23, 1854, that toppled part ofthe Japanese city of Tokyo, then went that same day at 700 kilometersper hour to break on the beaches of America.After nightfall the storm grew in intensity. As in the 1860 cyclone onRéunion Island, the barometer fell to 710 millimeters. At the close ofday, I saw a big ship passing on the horizon, struggling painfully. Itlay to at half steam in an effort to hold steady on the waves. It musthave been a steamer on one of those lines out of New York to Liverpoolor Le Havre. It soon vanished into the shadows.At ten o’clock in the evening, the skies caught on fire. The air wasstreaked with violent flashes of lightning. I couldn’t stand thisbrightness, but Captain Nemo stared straight at it, as if to inhalethe spirit of the storm. A dreadful noise filled the air, acomplicated noise made up of the roar of crashing breakers, the howlof the wind, claps of thunder. The wind shifted to every point of thehorizon, and the cyclone left the east to return there after passingthrough north, west, and south, moving in the opposite direction ofrevolving storms in the southern hemisphere.Oh, that Gulf Stream! It truly lives up to its nickname, the Lord ofStorms! All by itself it creates these fearsome cyclones through thedifference in temperature between its currents and the superimposedlayers of air.The rain was followed by a downpour of fire. Droplets of water changedinto exploding tufts. You would have thought Captain Nemo was courtinga death worthy of himself, seeking to be struck by lightning. In onehideous pitching movement, the Nautilus reared its steel spur into theair like a lightning rod, and I saw long sparks shoot down it.Shattered, at the end of my strength, I slid flat on my belly to thehatch. I opened it and went below to the lounge. By then the storm hadreached its maximum intensity. It was impossible to stand uprightinside the Nautilus.Captain Nemo reentered near midnight. I could hear the ballast tanksfilling little by little, and the Nautilus sank gently beneath thesurface of the waves.Through the lounge’s open windows, I saw large, frightened fishpassing like phantoms in the fiery waters. Some were struck bylightning right before my eyes!The Nautilus kept descending. I thought it would find calm again atfifteen meters down. No. The upper strata were too violentlyagitated. It needed to sink to fifty meters, searching for a restingplace in the bowels of the sea.But once there, what tranquility we found, what silence, what peaceall around us! Who would have known that a dreadful hurricane was thenunleashed on the surface of this ocean?CHAPTER 20In Latitude 47° 24’ and Longitude 17° 28’IN THE AFTERMATH of this storm, we were thrown back to the east. Awaywent any hope of escaping to the landing places of New York or theSt. Lawrence. In despair, poor Ned went into seclusion like CaptainNemo. Conseil and I no longer left each other.As I said, the Nautilus veered to the east. To be more accurate, Ishould have said to the northeast. Sometimes on the surface of thewaves, sometimes beneath them, the ship wandered for days amid thesemists so feared by navigators. These are caused chiefly by meltingice, which keeps the air extremely damp. How many ships have perishedin these waterways as they tried to get directions from the hazylights on the coast! How many casualties have been caused by theseopaque mists! How many collisions have occurred with these reefs,where the breaking surf is covered by the noise of the wind! How manyvessels have rammed each other, despite their running lights, despitethe warnings given by their bosun’s pipes and alarm bells!So the floor of this sea had the appearance of a battlefield whereevery ship defeated by the ocean still lay, some already old andencrusted, others newer and reflecting our beacon light on theirironwork and copper undersides. Among these vessels, how many wentdown with all hands, with their crews and hosts of immigrants, atthese trouble spots so prominent in the statistics: Cape Race,St. Paul Island, the Strait of Belle Isle, the St. Lawrence estuary!And in only a few years, how many victims have been furnished to theobituary notices by the Royal Mail, Inman, and Montreal lines; byvessels named the Solway, the Isis, the Paramatta, the Hungarian, theCanadian, the Anglo-Saxon, the Humboldt, and the United States, allrun aground; by the Arctic and the Lyonnais, sunk in collisions; bythe President, the Pacific, and the City of Glasgow, lost for reasonsunknown; in the midst of their gloomy rubble, the Nautilus navigatedas if passing the dead in review!By May 15 we were off the southern tip of the Grand Banks ofNewfoundland. These banks are the result of marine sedimentation, anextensive accumulation of organic waste brought either from theequator by the Gulf Stream’s current, or from the North Pole by thecountercurrent of cold water that skirts the American coast. Here,too, erratically drifting chunks collect from the ice breakup. Here ahuge boneyard forms from fish, mollusks, and zoophytes dying over itby the billions.The sea is of no great depth at the Grand Banks. A few hundred fathomsat best. But to the south there is a deep, suddenly occurringdepression, a 3,000-meter pit. Here the Gulf Stream widens. Its waterscome to full bloom. It loses its speed and temperature, but it turnsinto a sea.Among the fish that the Nautilus startled on its way, I’ll mention aone-meter lumpfish, blackish on top with orange on the belly and rareamong its brethren in that it practices monogamy, a good-sizedeelpout, a type of emerald moray whose flavor is excellent, wolffishwith big eyes in a head somewhat resembling a canine’s, viviparousblennies whose eggs hatch inside their bodies like those of snakes,bloated gobio (or black gudgeon) measuring two decimeters, grenadierswith long tails and gleaming with a silvery glow, speedy fishventuring far from their High Arctic seas.Our nets also hauled in a bold, daring, vigorous, and muscular fisharmed with prickles on its head and stings on its fins, a realscorpion measuring two to three meters, the ruthless enemy of cod,blennies, and salmon; it was the bullhead of the northerly seas, afish with red fins and a brown body covered with nodules. TheNautilus’s fishermen had some trouble getting a grip on this animal,which, thanks to the formation of its gill covers, can protect itsrespiratory organs from any parching contact with the air and can liveout of water for a good while.And I’ll mention—for the record—some little banded blennies thatfollow ships into the northernmost seas, sharp-snouted carp exclusiveto the north Atlantic, scorpionfish, and lastly the gadoid family,chiefly the cod species, which I detected in their waters of choiceover these inexhaustible Grand Banks.Because Newfoundland is simply an underwater peak, you could callthese cod mountain fish. While the Nautilus was clearing a paththrough their tight ranks, Conseil couldn’t refrain from making thiscomment:“Mercy, look at these cod!” he said. “Why, I thought cod were flat,like dab or sole!”“Innocent boy!” I exclaimed. “Cod are flat only at the grocery store,where they’re cut open and spread out on display. But in the waterthey’re like mullet, spindle-shaped and perfectly built for speed.”“I can easily believe master,” Conseil replied. “But what crowds ofthem! What swarms!”“Bah! My friend, there’d be many more without their enemies,scorpionfish and human beings! Do you know how many eggs have beencounted in a single female?”“I’ll go all out,” Conseil replied. “500,000.”“11,000,000, my friend.”“11,000,000! I refuse to accept that until I count them myself.”“So count them, Conseil. But it would be less work to believeme. Besides, Frenchmen, Englishmen, Americans, Danes, and Norwegianscatch these cod by the thousands. They’re eaten in prodigiousquantities, and without the astonishing fertility of these fish, theseas would soon be depopulated of them. Accordingly, in England andAmerica alone, 5,000 ships manned by 75,000 seamen go after cod. Eachship brings back an average catch of 4,400 fish, making22,000,000. Off the coast of Norway, the total is the same.”“Fine,” Conseil replied, “I’ll take master’s word for it. I won’tcount them.”“Count what?”“Those 11,000,000 eggs. But I’ll make one comment.”“What’s that?”“If all their eggs hatched, just four codfish could feed England,America, and Norway.”As we skimmed the depths of the Grand Banks, I could see perfectlythose long fishing lines, each armed with 200 hooks, that every boatdangled by the dozens. The lower end of each line dragged the bottomby means of a small grappling iron, and at the surface it was securedto the buoy-rope of a cork float. The Nautilus had to maneuvershrewdly in the midst of this underwater spiderweb.But the ship didn’t stay long in these heavily traveled waterways. Itwent up to about latitude 42 degrees. This brought it abreast ofSt. John’s in Newfoundland and Heart’s Content, where the AtlanticCable reaches its end point.Instead of continuing north, the Nautilus took an easterly heading, asif to go along this plateau on which the telegraph cable rests, wheremultiple soundings have given the contours of the terrain with theutmost accuracy.It was on May 17, about 500 miles from Heart’s Content and 2,800meters down, that I spotted this cable lying on the seafloor. Conseil,whom I hadn’t alerted, mistook it at first for a gigantic sea snakeand was gearing up to classify it in his best manner. But Ienlightened the fine lad and let him down gently by giving him variousdetails on the laying of this cable.The first cable was put down during the years 1857-1858; but aftertransmitting about 400 telegrams, it went dead. In 1863 engineersbuilt a new cable that measured 3,400 kilometers, weighed 4,500 metrictons, and was shipped aboard the Great Eastern. This attempt alsofailed.Now then, on May 25 while submerged to a depth of 3,836 meters, theNautilus lay in precisely the locality where this second cablesuffered the rupture that ruined the undertaking. It happened 638miles from the coast of Ireland. At around two o’clock in theafternoon, all contact with Europe broke off. The electricians onboard decided to cut the cable before fishing it up, and by eleveno’clock that evening they had retrieved the damaged part. Theyrepaired the joint and its splice; then the cable was resubmerged. Buta few days later it snapped again and couldn’t be recovered from theocean depths.These Americans refused to give up. The daring Cyrus Field, who hadrisked his whole fortune to promote this undertaking, called for a newbond issue. It sold out immediately. Another cable was put down underbetter conditions. Its sheaves of conducting wire were insulatedwithin a gutta-percha covering, which was protected by a padding oftextile material enclosed in a metal sheath. The Great Eastern putback to sea on July 13, 1866.The operation proceeded apace. Yet there was one hitch. As theygradually unrolled this third cable, the electricians observed onseveral occasions that someone had recently driven nails into it,trying to damage its core. Captain Anderson, his officers, and theengineers put their heads together, then posted a warning that if theculprit were detected, he would be thrown overboard without atrial. After that, these villainous attempts were not repeated.By July 23 the Great Eastern was lying no farther than 800 kilometersfrom Newfoundland when it received telegraphed news from Ireland of anarmistice signed between Prussia and Austria after the Battle ofSadova. Through the mists on the 27th, it sighted the port of Heart’sContent. The undertaking had ended happily, and in its first dispatch,young America addressed old Europe with these wise words so rarelyunderstood: “Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth to men ofgood will.”I didn’t expect to find this electric cable in mint condition, as itlooked on leaving its place of manufacture. The long snake was coveredwith seashell rubble and bristling with foraminifera; a crust of cakedgravel protected it from any mollusks that might bore into it. Itrested serenely, sheltered from the sea’s motions, under a pressurefavorable to the transmission of that electric spark that goes fromAmerica to Europe in 32/100 of a second. This cable will no doubt lastindefinitely because, as observers note, its gutta-percha casing isimproved by a stay in salt water.Besides, on this well-chosen plateau, the cable never lies at depthsthat could cause a break. The Nautilus followed it to its lowestreaches, located 4,431 meters down, and even there it rested withoutany stress or strain. Then we returned to the locality where the 1863accident had taken place.There the ocean floor formed a valley 120 kilometers wide, into whichyou could fit Mt. Blanc without its summit poking above the surface ofthe waves. This valley is closed off to the east by a sheer wall 2,000meters high. We arrived there on May 28, and the Nautilus lay nofarther than 150 kilometers from Ireland.Would Captain Nemo head up north and beach us on the British Isles?No. Much to my surprise, he went back down south and returned toEuropean seas. As we swung around the Emerald Isle, I spotted CapeClear for an instant, plus the lighthouse on Fastnet Rock that guidesall those thousands of ships setting out from Glasgow or Liverpool.An important question then popped into my head. Would the Nautilusdare to tackle the English Channel? Ned Land (who promptly reappearedafter we hugged shore) never stopped questioning me. What could Ianswer him? Captain Nemo remained invisible. After giving the Canadiana glimpse of American shores, was he about to show me the coast ofFrance?But the Nautilus kept gravitating southward. On May 30, in sight ofLand’s End, it passed between the lowermost tip of England and theScilly Islands, which it left behind to starboard.If it was going to enter the English Channel, it clearly needed tohead east. It did not.All day long on May 31, the Nautilus swept around the sea in a seriesof circles that had me deeply puzzled. It seemed to be searching for alocality that it had some trouble finding. At noon Captain Nemohimself came to take our bearings. He didn’t address a word to me. Helooked gloomier than ever. What was filling him with such sadness? Wasit our proximity to these European shores? Was he reliving hismemories of that country he had left behind? If so, what did he feel?Remorse or regret? For a good while these thoughts occupied my mind,and I had a hunch that fate would soon give away the captain’ssecrets.The next day, June 1, the Nautilus kept to the same tack. It wasobviously trying to locate some precise spot in the ocean. Just as onthe day before, Captain Nemo came to take the altitude of the sun. Thesea was smooth, the skies clear. Eight miles to the east, a bigsteamship was visible on the horizon line. No flag was flapping fromthe gaff of its fore-and-aft sail, and I couldn’t tell itsnationality.A few minutes before the sun passed its zenith, Captain Nemo raisedhis sextant and took his sights with the utmost precision. Theabsolute calm of the waves facilitated this operation. The Nautiluslay motionless, neither rolling nor pitching.I was on the platform just then. After determining our position, thecaptain pronounced only these words:“It’s right here!”He went down the hatch. Had he seen that vessel change course andseemingly head toward us? I’m unable to say.I returned to the lounge. The hatch closed, and I heard water hissingin the ballast tanks. The Nautilus began to sink on a vertical line,because its propeller was in check and no longer furnished any forwardmotion.Some minutes later it stopped at a depth of 833 meters and came torest on the seafloor.The ceiling lights in the lounge then went out, the panels opened, andthrough the windows I saw, for a half-mile radius, the sea brightlylit by the beacon’s rays.I looked to port and saw nothing but the immenseness of these tranquilwaters.To starboard, a prominent bulge on the sea bottom caught myattention. You would have thought it was some ruin enshrouded in acrust of whitened seashells, as if under a mantle of snow. Carefullyexamining this mass, I could identify the swollen outlines of a shipshorn of its masts, which must have sunk bow first. This casualtycertainly dated from some far-off time. To be so caked with thelimestone of these waters, this wreckage must have spent many a yearon the ocean floor.What ship was this? Why had the Nautilus come to visit its grave? Wasit something other than a maritime accident that had dragged thiscraft under the waters?I wasn’t sure what to think, but next to me I heard Captain Nemo’svoice slowly say:“Originally this ship was christened the Marseillais. It carriedseventy-four cannons and was launched in 1762. On August 13, 1778,commanded by La Poype-Vertrieux, it fought valiantly against thePreston. On July 4, 1779, as a member of the squadron under Admirald’Estaing, it assisted in the capture of the island of Grenada. OnSeptember 5, 1781, under the Count de Grasse, it took part in theBattle of Chesapeake Bay. In 1794 the new Republic of France changedthe name of this ship. On April 16 of that same year, it joined thesquadron at Brest under Rear Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse, who wasentrusted with escorting a convoy of wheat coming from America underthe command of Admiral Van Stabel. In this second year of the FrenchRevolutionary Calendar, on the 11th and 12th days in the Month ofPasture, this squadron fought an encounter with English vessels. Sir,today is June 1, 1868, or the 13th day in the Month ofPasture. Seventy-four years ago to the day, at this very spot inlatitude 47 degrees 24’ and longitude 17 degrees 28’, this ship sankafter a heroic battle; its three masts gone, water in its hold, athird of its crew out of action, it preferred to go to the bottom withits 356 seamen rather than surrender; and with its flag nailed up onthe afterdeck, it disappeared beneath the waves to shouts of ‘Longlive the Republic!’”“This is the Avenger!” I exclaimed.“Yes, sir! The Avenger! A splendid name!” Captain Nemo murmured,crossing his arms.CHAPTER 21A Mass ExecutionTHE WAY HE SAID THIS, the unexpectedness of this scene, first thebiography of this patriotic ship, then the excitement with which thiseccentric individual pronounced these last words—the name Avengerwhose significance could not escape me—all this, taken together, had aprofound impact on my mind. My eyes never left the captain. Handsoutstretched toward the sea, he contemplated the proud wreck withblazing eyes. Perhaps I would never learn who he was, where he camefrom or where he was heading, but more and more I could see adistinction between the man and the scientist. It was no ordinarymisanthropy that kept Captain Nemo and his companions sequesteredinside the Nautilus’s plating, but a hate so monstrous or so sublimethat the passing years could never weaken it.Did this hate also hunger for vengeance? Time would soon tell.Meanwhile the Nautilus rose slowly to the surface of the sea, and Iwatched the Avenger’s murky shape disappearing little by little. Soona gentle rolling told me that we were afloat in the open air.Just then a hollow explosion was audible. I looked at the captain. Thecaptain did not stir.“Captain?” I said.He didn’t reply.I left him and climbed onto the platform. Conseil and the Canadianwere already there.“What caused that explosion?” I asked.“A cannon going off,” Ned Land replied.I stared in the direction of the ship I had spotted. It was headingtoward the Nautilus, and you could tell it had put on steam. Six milesseparated it from us.“What sort of craft is it, Ned?”“From its rigging and its low masts,” the Canadian replied, “I betit’s a warship. Here’s hoping it pulls up and sinks this damnedNautilus!”“Ned my friend,” Conseil replied, “what harm could it do the Nautilus?Will it attack us under the waves? Will it cannonade us at the bottomof the sea?”“Tell me, Ned,” I asked, “can you make out the nationality of thatcraft?”Creasing his brow, lowering his lids, and puckering the corners of hiseyes, the Canadian focused the full power of his gaze on the ship fora short while.“No, sir,” he replied. “I can’t make out what nation it’s from. It’sflying no flag. But I’ll swear it’s a warship, because there’s a longpennant streaming from the peak of its mainmast.”For a quarter of an hour, we continued to watch the craft bearing downon us. But it was inconceivable to me that it had discovered theNautilus at such a distance, still less that it knew what thisunderwater machine really was.Soon the Canadian announced that the craft was a big battleship, adouble-decker ironclad complete with ram. Dark, dense smoke burst fromits two funnels. Its furled sails merged with the lines of itsyardarms. The gaff of its fore-and-aft sail flew no flag. Its distancestill kept us from distinguishing the colors of its pennant, which wasfluttering like a thin ribbon.It was coming on fast. If Captain Nemo let it approach, a chance forsalvation might be available to us.“Sir,” Ned Land told me, “if that boat gets within a mile of us, I’mjumping overboard, and I suggest you follow suit.”I didn’t reply to the Canadian’s proposition but kept watching theship, which was looming larger on the horizon. Whether it was English,French, American, or Russian, it would surely welcome us aboard if wecould just get to it.“Master may recall,” Conseil then said, “that we have some experiencewith swimming. He can rely on me to tow him to that vessel, if he’sagreeable to going with our friend Ned.”Before I could reply, white smoke streamed from the battleship’sbow. Then, a few seconds later, the waters splashed astern of theNautilus, disturbed by the fall of a heavy object. Soon after, anexplosion struck my ears.“What’s this? They’re firing at us!” I exclaimed.“Good lads!” the Canadian muttered.“That means they don’t see us as castaways clinging to some wreckage!”“With all due respect to master—gracious!” Conseil put in, shaking offthe water that had sprayed over him from another shell. “With all duerespect to master, they’ve discovered the narwhale and they’recannonading the same.”“But it must be clear to them,” I exclaimed, “that they’re dealingwith human beings.”“Maybe that’s why!” Ned Land replied, staring hard at me.The full truth dawned on me. Undoubtedly people now knew where theystood on the existence of this so-called monster. Undoubtedly thelatter’s encounter with the Abraham Lincoln, when the Canadian hit itwith his harpoon, had led Commander Farragut to recognize the narwhaleas actually an underwater boat, more dangerous than any unearthlycetacean!Yes, this had to be the case, and undoubtedly they were now chasingthis dreadful engine of destruction on every sea!Dreadful indeed, if, as we could assume, Captain Nemo had been usingthe Nautilus in works of vengeance! That night in the middle of theIndian Ocean, when he imprisoned us in the cell, hadn’t he attackedsome ship? That man now buried in the coral cemetery, wasn’t he thevictim of some collision caused by the Nautilus? Yes, I repeat: thishad to be the case. One part of Captain Nemo’s secret life had beenunveiled. And now, even though his identity was still unknown, atleast the nations allied against him knew they were no longer huntingsome fairy-tale monster, but a man who had sworn an implacable hatetoward them!This whole fearsome sequence of events appeared in my mind’seye. Instead of encountering friends on this approaching ship, wewould find only pitiless enemies.Meanwhile shells fell around us in increasing numbers. Some, meetingthe liquid surface, would ricochet and vanish into the sea atconsiderable distances. But none of them reached the Nautilus.By then the ironclad was no more than three miles off. Despite itsviolent cannonade, Captain Nemo hadn’t appeared on the platform. Andyet if one of those conical shells had scored a routine hit on theNautilus’s hull, it could have been fatal to him.The Canadian then told me:“Sir, we’ve got to do everything we can to get out of this jam! Let’ssignal them! Damnation! Maybe they’ll realize we’re decent people!”Ned Land pulled out his handkerchief to wave it in the air. But he hadbarely unfolded it when he was felled by an iron fist, and despite hisgreat strength, he tumbled to the deck.“Scum!” the captain shouted. “Do you want to be nailed to theNautilus’s spur before it charges that ship?”Dreadful to hear, Captain Nemo was even more dreadful to see. His facewas pale from some spasm of his heart, which must have stopped beatingfor an instant. His pupils were hideously contracted. His voice was nolonger speaking, it was bellowing. Bending from the waist, he shookthe Canadian by the shoulders.Then, dropping Ned and turning to the battleship, whose shells wereshowering around him:“O ship of an accursed nation, you know who I am!” he shouted in hispowerful voice. “And I don’t need your colors to recognize you! Look!I’ll show you mine!”And in the bow of the platform, Captain Nemo unfurled a black flag,like the one he had left planted at the South Pole.Just then a shell hit the Nautilus’s hull obliquely, failed to breachit, ricocheted near the captain, and vanished into the sea.Captain Nemo shrugged his shoulders. Then, addressing me:“Go below!” he told me in a curt tone. “You and your companions, gobelow!”“Sir,” I exclaimed, “are you going to attack this ship?”“Sir, I’m going to sink it.”“You wouldn’t!”“I will,” Captain Nemo replied icily. “You’re ill-advised to passjudgment on me, sir. Fate has shown you what you weren’t meant tosee. The attack has come. Our reply will be dreadful. Get backinside!”“From what country is that ship?”“You don’t know? Fine, so much the better! At least its nationalitywill remain a secret to you. Go below!”The Canadian, Conseil, and I could only obey. Some fifteen of theNautilus’s seamen surrounded their captain and stared with a feelingof implacable hate at the ship bearing down on them. You could feelthe same spirit of vengeance enkindling their every soul.I went below just as another projectile scraped the Nautilus’s hull,and I heard the captain exclaim:“Shoot, you demented vessel! Shower your futile shells! You won’tescape the Nautilus’s spur! But this isn’t the place where you’llperish! I don’t want your wreckage mingling with that of the Avenger!”I repaired to my stateroom. The captain and his chief officer stayedon the platform. The propeller was set in motion. The Nautilus swiftlyretreated, putting us outside the range of the vessel’s shells. Butthe chase continued, and Captain Nemo was content to keep hisdistance.Near four o’clock in the afternoon, unable to control the impatienceand uneasiness devouring me, I went back to the centralcompanionway. The hatch was open. I ventured onto the platform. Thecaptain was still strolling there, his steps agitated. He stared atthe ship, which stayed to his leeward five or six miles off. He wascircling it like a wild beast, drawing it eastward, letting it chaseafter him. Yet he didn’t attack. Was he, perhaps, still undecided?I tried to intervene one last time. But I had barely queried CaptainNemo when the latter silenced me:“I’m the law, I’m the tribunal! I’m the oppressed, and there are myoppressors! Thanks to them, I’ve witnessed the destruction ofeverything I loved, cherished, and venerated—homeland, wife, children,father, and mother! There lies everything I hate! Not another word outof you!”I took a last look at the battleship, which was putting on steam. ThenI rejoined Ned and Conseil.“We’ll escape!” I exclaimed.“Good,” Ned put in. “Where’s that ship from?”“I’ve no idea. But wherever it’s from, it will sink beforenightfall. In any event, it’s better to perish with it than beaccomplices in some act of revenge whose merits we can’t gauge.”“That’s my feeling,” Ned Land replied coolly. “Let’s wait fornightfall.”Night fell. A profound silence reigned on board. The compass indicatedthat the Nautilus hadn’t changed direction. I could hear the beat ofits propeller, churning the waves with steady speed. Staying on thesurface of the water, it rolled gently, sometimes to one side,sometimes to the other.My companions and I had decided to escape as soon as the vessel cameclose enough for us to be heard—or seen, because the moon would waxfull in three days and was shining brightly. Once we were aboard thatship, if we couldn’t ward off the blow that threatened it, at least wecould do everything that circumstances permitted. Several times Ithought the Nautilus was about to attack. But it was content to letits adversary approach, and then it would quickly resume itsretreating ways.Part of the night passed without incident. We kept watch for anopportunity to take action. We talked little, being too keyed up. NedLand was all for jumping overboard. I forced him to wait. As I saw it,the Nautilus would attack the double-decker on the surface of thewaves, and then it would be not only possible but easy to escape.At three o’clock in the morning, full of uneasiness, I climbed ontothe platform. Captain Nemo hadn’t left it. He stood in the bow next tohis flag, which a mild breeze was unfurling above his head. His eyesnever left that vessel. The extraordinary intensity of his gaze seemedto attract it, beguile it, and draw it more surely than if he had itin tow!The moon then passed its zenith. Jupiter was rising in the east. Inthe midst of this placid natural setting, sky and ocean competed witheach other in tranquility, and the sea offered the orb of night theloveliest mirror ever to reflect its image.And when I compared this deep calm of the elements with all the furyseething inside the plating of this barely perceptible Nautilus, Ishivered all over.The vessel was two miles off. It drew nearer, always moving toward thephosphorescent glow that signaled the Nautilus’s presence. I saw itsgreen and red running lights, plus the white lantern hanging from thelarge stay of its foremast. Hazy flickerings were reflected on itsrigging and indicated that its furnaces were pushed to thelimit. Showers of sparks and cinders of flaming coal escaped from itsfunnels, spangling the air with stars.I stood there until six o’clock in the morning, Captain Nemo neverseeming to notice me. The vessel lay a mile and a half off, and withthe first glimmers of daylight, it resumed its cannonade. The timecouldn’t be far away when the Nautilus would attack its adversary, andmy companions and I would leave forever this man I dared not judge.I was about to go below to alert them, when the chief officer climbedonto the platform. Several seamen were with him. Captain Nemo didn’tsee them, or didn’t want to see them. They carried out certainprocedures that, on the Nautilus, you could call “clearing the decksfor action.” They were quite simple. The manropes that formed ahandrail around the platform were lowered. Likewise the pilothouse andthe beacon housing were withdrawn into the hull until they lay exactlyflush with it. The surface of this long sheet-iron cigar no longeroffered a single protrusion that could hamper its maneuvers.I returned to the lounge. The Nautilus still emerged above thesurface. A few morning gleams infiltrated the liquid strata. Beneaththe undulations of the billows, the windows were enlivened by theblushing of the rising sun. That dreadful day of June 2 had dawned.At seven o’clock the log told me that the Nautilus had reducedspeed. I realized that it was letting the warship approach. Moreover,the explosions grew more intensely audible. Shells furrowed the wateraround us, drilling through it with an odd hissing sound.“My friends,” I said, “it’s time. Let’s shake hands, and may God bewith us!”Ned Land was determined, Conseil calm, I myself nervous and barely incontrol.We went into the library. Just as I pushed open the door leading tothe well of the central companionway, I heard the hatch close sharplyoverhead.The Canadian leaped up the steps, but I stopped him. A well-knownhissing told me that water was entering the ship’s ballasttanks. Indeed, in a few moments the Nautilus had submerged some metersbelow the surface of the waves.I understood this maneuver. It was too late to take action. TheNautilus wasn’t going to strike the double-decker where it was clad inimpenetrable iron armor, but below its waterline, where the metalcarapace no longer protected its planking.We were prisoners once more, unwilling spectators at the performanceof this gruesome drama. But we barely had time to think. Taking refugein my stateroom, we stared at each other without pronouncing aword. My mind was in a total daze. My mental processes came to a deadstop. I hovered in that painful state that predominates during theperiod of anticipation before some frightful explosion. I waited, Ilistened, I lived only through my sense of hearing!Meanwhile the Nautilus’s speed had increased appreciably. So it wasgathering momentum. Its entire hull was vibrating.Suddenly I let out a yell. There had been a collision, but it wascomparatively mild. I could feel the penetrating force of the steelspur. I could hear scratchings and scrapings. Carried away with itsdriving power, the Nautilus had passed through the vessel’s mass likea sailmaker’s needle through canvas!I couldn’t hold still. Frantic, going insane, I leaped out of mystateroom and rushed into the lounge.Captain Nemo was there. Mute, gloomy, implacable, he was staringthrough the port panel.An enormous mass was sinking beneath the waters, and the Nautilus,missing none of its death throes, was descending into the depths withit. Ten meters away, I could see its gaping hull, into which water wasrushing with a sound of thunder, then its double rows of cannons andrailings. Its deck was covered with dark, quivering shadows.The water was rising. Those poor men leaped up into the shrouds, clungto the masts, writhed beneath the waters. It was a human anthill thatan invading sea had caught by surprise!Paralyzed, rigid with anguish, my hair standing on end, my eyespopping out of my head, short of breath, suffocating, speechless, Istared—I too! I was glued to the window by an irresistible allure!The enormous vessel settled slowly. Following it down, the Nautiluskept watch on its every movement. Suddenly there was an eruption. Theair compressed inside the craft sent its decks flying, as if thepowder stores had been ignited. The thrust of the waters was so great,the Nautilus swerved away.The poor ship then sank more swiftly. Its mastheads appeared, ladenwith victims, then its crosstrees bending under clusters of men,finally the peak of its mainmast. Then the dark mass disappeared, andwith it a crew of corpses dragged under by fearsome eddies. . . .I turned to Captain Nemo. This dreadful executioner, this truearchangel of hate, was still staring. When it was all over, CaptainNemo headed to the door of his stateroom, opened it, and entered. Ifollowed him with my eyes.On the rear paneling, beneath the portraits of his heroes, I saw theportrait of a still-youthful woman with two little children. CaptainNemo stared at them for a few moments, stretched out his arms to them,sank to his knees, and melted into sobs.CHAPTER 22The Last Words of Captain NemoTHE PANELS CLOSED over this frightful view, but the lights didn’t goon in the lounge. Inside the Nautilus all was gloom and silence. Itleft this place of devastation with prodigious speed, 100 feet beneaththe waters. Where was it going? North or south? Where would the manflee after this horrible act of revenge?I reentered my stateroom, where Ned and Conseil were waitingsilently. Captain Nemo filled me with insurmountable horror. Whateverhe had once suffered at the hands of humanity, he had no right to meteout such punishment. He had made me, if not an accomplice, at least aneyewitness to his vengeance! Even this was intolerable.At eleven o’clock the electric lights came back on. I went into thelounge. It was deserted. I consulted the various instruments. TheNautilus was fleeing northward at a speed of twenty-five miles perhour, sometimes on the surface of the sea, sometimes thirty feetbeneath it.After our position had been marked on the chart, I saw that we werepassing into the mouth of the English Channel, that our heading wouldtake us to the northernmost seas with incomparable speed.I could barely glimpse the swift passing of longnose sharks,hammerhead sharks, spotted dogfish that frequent these waters, bigeagle rays, swarms of seahorse looking like knights on a chessboard,eels quivering like fireworks serpents, armies of crab that fledobliquely by crossing their pincers over their carapaces, finallyschools of porpoise that held contests of speed with the Nautilus. Butby this point observing, studying, and classifying were out of thequestion.By evening we had cleared 200 leagues up the Atlantic. Shadowsgathered and gloom overran the sea until the moon came up.I repaired to my stateroom. I couldn’t sleep. I was assaulted bynightmares. That horrible scene of destruction kept repeating in mymind’s eye.From that day forward, who knows where the Nautilus took us in thenorth Atlantic basin? Always at incalculable speed! Always amid theHigh Arctic mists! Did it call at the capes of Spitzbergen or theshores of Novaya Zemlya? Did it visit such uncharted seas as the WhiteSea, the Kara Sea, the Gulf of Ob, the Lyakhov Islands, or thoseunknown beaches on the Siberian coast? I’m unable to say. I lost trackof the passing hours. Time was in abeyance on the ship’s clocks. Ashappens in the polar regions, it seemed that night and day no longerfollowed their normal sequence. I felt myself being drawn into thatstrange domain where the overwrought imagination of Edgar Allan Poewas at home. Like his fabled Arthur Gordon Pym, I expected any momentto see that “shrouded human figure, very far larger in its proportionsthan any dweller among men,” thrown across the cataract that protectsthe outskirts of the pole!I estimate—but perhaps I’m mistaken—that the Nautilus’s haphazardcourse continued for fifteen or twenty days, and I’m not sure how longthis would have gone on without the catastrophe that ended ourvoyage. As for Captain Nemo, he was no longer in the picture. As forhis chief officer, the same applied. Not one crewman was visible for asingle instant. The Nautilus cruised beneath the waters almostcontinuously. When it rose briefly to the surface to renew our air,the hatches opened and closed as if automated. No more positions werereported on the world map. I didn’t know where we were.I’ll also mention that the Canadian, at the end of his strength andpatience, made no further appearances. Conseil couldn’t coax a singleword out of him and feared that, in a fit of delirium while under thesway of a ghastly homesickness, Ned would kill himself. So he kept adevoted watch on his friend every instant.You can appreciate that under these conditions, our situation hadbecome untenable.One morning—whose date I’m unable to specify—I was slumbering near thefirst hours of daylight, a painful, sickly slumber. Waking up, I sawNed Land leaning over me, and I heard him tell me in a low voice:“We’re going to escape!”I sat up.“When?” I asked.“Tonight. There doesn’t seem to be any supervision left on theNautilus. You’d think a total daze was reigning on board. Will you beready, sir?”“Yes. Where are we?”“In sight of land. I saw it through the mists just this morning,twenty miles to the east.”“What land is it?”“I’ve no idea, but whatever it is, there we’ll take refuge.”“Yes, Ned! We’ll escape tonight even if the sea swallows us up!”“The sea’s rough, the wind’s blowing hard, but a twenty-mile run inthe Nautilus’s nimble longboat doesn’t scare me. Unknown to the crew,I’ve stowed some food and flasks of water inside.”“I’m with you.”“What’s more,” the Canadian added, “if they catch me, I’ll defendmyself, I’ll fight to the death.”“Then we’ll die together, Ned my friend.”My mind was made up. The Canadian left me. I went out on the platform,where I could barely stand upright against the jolts of thebillows. The skies were threatening, but land lay inside those densemists, and we had to escape. Not a single day, or even a single hour,could we afford to lose.I returned to the lounge, dreading yet desiring an encounter withCaptain Nemo, wanting yet not wanting to see him. What would I say tohim? How could I hide the involuntary horror he inspired in me? No! Itwas best not to meet him face to face! Best to try and forget him! Andyet . . . !How long that day seemed, the last I would spend aboard the Nautilus!I was left to myself. Ned Land and Conseil avoided speaking to me,afraid they would give themselves away.At six o’clock I ate supper, but I had no appetite. Despite myrevulsion, I forced it down, wanting to keep my strength up.At 6:30 Ned Land entered my stateroom. He told me:“We won’t see each other again before we go. At ten o’clock the moonwon’t be up yet. We’ll take advantage of the darkness. Come to theskiff. Conseil and I will be inside waiting for you.”The Canadian left without giving me time to answer him.I wanted to verify the Nautilus’s heading. I made my way to thelounge. We were racing north-northeast with frightful speed, fiftymeters down.I took one last look at the natural wonders and artistic treasuresamassed in the museum, this unrivaled collection doomed to perishsomeday in the depths of the seas, together with its curator. I wantedto establish one supreme impression in my mind. I stayed there anhour, basking in the aura of the ceiling lights, passing in review thetreasures shining in their glass cases. Then I returned to mystateroom.There I dressed in sturdy seafaring clothes. I gathered my notes andpacked them tenderly about my person. My heart was poundingmightily. I couldn’t curb its pulsations. My anxiety and agitationwould certainly have given me away if Captain Nemo had seen me.What was he doing just then? I listened at the door to hisstateroom. I heard the sound of footsteps. Captain Nemo was inside. Hehadn’t gone to bed. With his every movement I imagined he would appearand ask me why I wanted to escape! I felt in a perpetual state ofalarm. My imagination magnified this sensation. The feeling became soacute, I wondered whether it wouldn’t be better to enter the captain’sstateroom, dare him face to face, brave it out with word and deed!It was an insane idea. Fortunately I controlled myself and stretchedout on the bed to soothe my bodily agitation. My nerves calmed alittle, but with my brain so aroused, I did a swift review of my wholeexistence aboard the Nautilus, every pleasant or unpleasant incidentthat had crossed my path since I went overboard from the AbrahamLincoln: the underwater hunting trip, the Torres Strait, our runningaground, the savages of Papua, the coral cemetery, the Suezpassageway, the island of Santorini, the Cretan diver, the Bay ofVigo, Atlantis, the Ice Bank, the South Pole, our imprisonment in theice, the battle with the devilfish, the storm in the Gulf Stream, theAvenger, and that horrible scene of the vessel sinking with its crew. . . ! All these events passed before my eyes like backdropsunrolling upstage in a theater. In this strange setting Captain Nemothen grew fantastically. His features were accentuated, taking onsuperhuman proportions. He was no longer my equal, he was the Man ofthe Waters, the Spirit of the Seas.By then it was 9:30. I held my head in both hands to keep it frombursting. I closed my eyes. I no longer wanted to think. A half hourstill to wait! A half hour of nightmares that could drive me insane!Just then I heard indistinct chords from the organ, melancholyharmonies from some undefinable hymn, actual pleadings from a soultrying to sever its earthly ties. I listened with all my senses atonce, barely breathing, immersed like Captain Nemo in this musicaltrance that was drawing him beyond the bounds of this world.Then a sudden thought terrified me. Captain Nemo had left hisstateroom. He was in the same lounge I had to cross in order toescape. There I would encounter him one last time. He would see me,perhaps speak to me! One gesture from him could obliterate me, asingle word shackle me to his vessel!Even so, ten o’clock was about to strike. It was time to leave mystateroom and rejoin my companions.I dared not hesitate, even if Captain Nemo stood before me. I openedthe door cautiously, but as it swung on its hinges, it seemed to makea frightful noise. This noise existed, perhaps, only in myimagination!I crept forward through the Nautilus’s dark gangways, pausing aftereach step to curb the pounding of my heart.I arrived at the corner door of the lounge. I opened it gently. Thelounge was plunged in profound darkness. Chords from the organ werereverberating faintly. Captain Nemo was there. He didn’t see me. Evenin broad daylight I doubt that he would have noticed me, so completelywas he immersed in his trance.I inched over the carpet, avoiding the tiniest bump whose noise mightgive me away. It took me five minutes to reach the door at the farend, which led into the library.I was about to open it when a gasp from Captain Nemo nailed me to thespot. I realized that he was standing up. I even got a glimpse of himbecause some rays of light from the library had filtered into thelounge. He was coming toward me, arms crossed, silent, not walking butgliding like a ghost. His chest was heaving, swelling with sobs. And Iheard him murmur these words, the last of his to reach my ears:“O almighty God! Enough! Enough!”Was it a vow of repentance that had just escaped from this man’sconscience . . . ?Frantic, I rushed into the library. I climbed the centralcompanionway, and going along the upper gangway, I arrived at theskiff. I went through the opening that had already given access to mytwo companions.“Let’s go, let’s go!” I exclaimed.“Right away!” the Canadian replied.First, Ned Land closed and bolted the opening cut into the Nautilus’ssheet iron, using the monkey wrench he had with him. After likewiseclosing the opening in the skiff, the Canadian began to unscrew thenuts still bolting us to the underwater boat.Suddenly a noise from the ship’s interior became audible. Voices wereanswering each other hurriedly. What was it? Had they spotted ourescape? I felt Ned Land sliding a dagger into my hand.“Yes,” I muttered, “we know how to die!”The Canadian paused in his work. But one word twenty times repeated,one dreadful word, told me the reason for the agitation spreadingaboard the Nautilus. We weren’t the cause of the crew’s concern.“Maelstrom! Maelstrom!” they were shouting.The Maelstrom! Could a more frightening name have rung in our earsunder more frightening circumstances? Were we lying in the dangerouswaterways off the Norwegian coast? Was the Nautilus being dragged intothis whirlpool just as the skiff was about to detach from its plating?As you know, at the turn of the tide, the waters confined between theFaroe and Lofoten Islands rush out with irresistible violence. Theyform a vortex from which no ship has ever been able toescape. Monstrous waves race together from every point of thehorizon. They form a whirlpool aptly called “the ocean’s navel,” whoseattracting power extends a distance of fifteen kilometers. It can suckdown not only ships but whales, and even polar bears from thenorthernmost regions.This was where the Nautilus had been sent accidentally—or perhapsdeliberately—by its captain. It was sweeping around in a spiral whoseradius kept growing smaller and smaller. The skiff, still attached tothe ship’s plating, was likewise carried around at dizzying speed. Icould feel us whirling. I was experiencing that accompanying nauseathat follows such continuous spinning motions. We were in dread, inthe last stages of sheer horror, our blood frozen in our veins, ournerves numb, drenched in cold sweat as if from the throes of dying!And what a noise around our frail skiff! What roars echoing fromseveral miles away! What crashes from the waters breaking againstsharp rocks on the seafloor, where the hardest objects are smashed,where tree trunks are worn down and worked into “a shaggy fur,” asNorwegians express it!What a predicament! We were rocking frightfully. The Nautilus defendeditself like a human being. Its steel muscles were cracking. Sometimesit stood on end, the three of us along with it!“We’ve got to hold on tight,” Ned said, “and screw the nuts downagain! If we can stay attached to the Nautilus, we can still make it. . . !”He hadn’t finished speaking when a cracking sound occurred. The nutsgave way, and ripped out of its socket, the skiff was hurled like astone from a sling into the midst of the vortex.My head struck against an iron timber, and with this violent shock Ilost consciousness.CHAPTER 23ConclusionWE COME TO the conclusion of this voyage under the seas. What happenedthat night, how the skiff escaped from the Maelstrom’s fearsomeeddies, how Ned Land, Conseil, and I got out of that whirlpool, I’munable to say. But when I regained consciousness, I was lying in afisherman’s hut on one of the Lofoten Islands. My two companions, safeand sound, were at my bedside clasping my hands. We embraced eachother heartily.Just now we can’t even dream of returning to France. Travel betweenupper Norway and the south is limited. So I have to wait for thearrival of a steamboat that provides bimonthly service from NorthCape.So it is here, among these gallant people who have taken us in, thatI’m reviewing my narrative of these adventures. It is accurate. Not afact has been omitted, not a detail has been exaggerated. It’s thefaithful record of this inconceivable expedition into an element nowbeyond human reach, but where progress will someday make greatinroads.Will anyone believe me? I don’t know. Ultimately it’sunimportant. What I can now assert is that I’ve earned the right tospeak of these seas, beneath which in less than ten months, I’vecleared 20,000 leagues in this underwater tour of the world that hasshown me so many wonders across the Pacific, the Indian Ocean, the RedSea, the Mediterranean, the Atlantic, the southernmost andnorthernmost seas!But what happened to the Nautilus? Did it withstand the Maelstrom’sclutches? Is Captain Nemo alive? Is he still under the ocean pursuinghis frightful program of revenge, or did he stop after that latestmass execution? Will the waves someday deliver that manuscript thatcontains his full life story? Will I finally learn the man’s name?Will the nationality of the stricken warship tell us the nationalityof Captain Nemo?I hope so. I likewise hope that his powerful submersible has defeatedthe sea inside its most dreadful whirlpool, that the Nautilus hassurvived where so many ships have perished! If this is the case andCaptain Nemo still inhabits the ocean—his adopted country—may the hatebe appeased in that fierce heart! May the contemplation of so manywonders extinguish the spirit of vengeance in him! May the executionerpass away, and the scientist continue his peaceful exploration of theseas! If his destiny is strange, it’s also sublime. Haven’t Iencompassed it myself? Didn’t I lead ten months of this otherworldlyexistence? Thus to that question asked 6,000 years ago in the Book ofEcclesiastes—“Who can fathom the soundless depths?”—two men out of allhumanity have now earned the right to reply. Captain Nemo and I.END OF THE SECOND PART*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY THOUSAND LEAGUES UNDER THE SEAS  ***Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in theUnited States without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmconcept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from theperson or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph1.E.8.1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("theFoundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tmworks in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License whenyou share it without charge with others.This particular work is one of the few individual works protectedby copyright law in the United States and most of the remainder of theworld, included in the Project Gutenberg collection with thepermission of the copyright holder. Information on the copyright ownerfor this particular work and the terms of use imposed by the copyrightholder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this work.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any workon which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and with almost norestrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use itunder the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with thiseBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in theUnited States, you will have to check the laws of the country whereyou are located before using this eBook.1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tmtrademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a formatother than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "PlainVanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksprovided that:* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive fromthe use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the methodyou already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owedto the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he hasagreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paidwithin 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or arelegally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royaltypayments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified inSection 4, "Information about donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation."* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifiesyou in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/hedoes not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense. You must require such a user to return or destroy allcopies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinueall use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tmworks.* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund ofany money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in theelectronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days ofreceipt of the work.* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for freedistribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page atwww.gutenberg.orgSection 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state's laws.The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation's websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive withoutwidespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particularstate visit www.gutenberg.org/donateWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.orgThis website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-----
WOO
﻿[Illustration]The Wonderful Wizard of Ozby L. Frank BaumThis book is dedicated to my good friend & comradeMy WifeL.F.B.ContentsIntroductionChapter I. The CycloneChapter II. The Council with the MunchkinsChapter III. How Dorothy Saved the ScarecrowChapter IV. The Road Through the ForestChapter V. The Rescue of the Tin WoodmanChapter VI.  The Cowardly LionChapter VII. The Journey to the Great OzChapter VIII. The Deadly Poppy FieldChapter IX. The Queen of the Field MiceChapter X. The Guardian of the GatesChapter XI. The Emerald City of OzChapter XII. The Search for the Wicked WitchChapter XIII. The RescueChapter XIV. The Winged MonkeysChapter XV. The Discovery of Oz, the TerribleChapter XVI. The Magic Art of the Great HumbugChapter XVII. How the Balloon Was LaunchedChapter XVIII. Away to the SouthChapter XIX. Attacked by the Fighting TreesChapter XX. The Dainty China CountryChapter XXI. The Lion Becomes the King of BeastsChapter XXII. The Country of the QuadlingsChapter XXIII. Glinda The Good Witch Grants Dorothy’s WishChapter XXIV. Home AgainIntroductionFolklore, legends, myths and fairy tales have followed childhoodthrough the ages, for every healthy youngster has a wholesome andinstinctive love for stories fantastic, marvelous and manifestlyunreal. The winged fairies of Grimm and Andersen have brought morehappiness to childish hearts than all other human creations.Yet the old time fairy tale, having served for generations, may now beclassed as “historical” in the children’s library; for the time hascome for a series of newer “wonder tales” in which the stereotypedgenie, dwarf and fairy are eliminated, together with all the horribleand blood-curdling incidents devised by their authors to point afearsome moral to each tale. Modern education includes morality;therefore the modern child seeks only entertainment in its wonder talesand gladly dispenses with all disagreeable incident.Having this thought in mind, the story of “The Wonderful Wizard of Oz”was written solely to please children of today. It aspires to being amodernized fairy tale, in which the wonderment and joy are retained andthe heartaches and nightmares are left out.L. Frank BaumChicago, April, 1900.The Wonderful Wizard of OzChapter IThe CycloneDorothy lived in the midst of the great Kansas prairies, with UncleHenry, who was a farmer, and Aunt Em, who was the farmer’s wife. Theirhouse was small, for the lumber to build it had to be carried by wagonmany miles. There were four walls, a floor and a roof, which made oneroom; and this room contained a rusty looking cookstove, a cupboard forthe dishes, a table, three or four chairs, and the beds. Uncle Henryand Aunt Em had a big bed in one corner, and Dorothy a little bed inanother corner. There was no garret at all, and no cellar—except asmall hole dug in the ground, called a cyclone cellar, where the familycould go in case one of those great whirlwinds arose, mighty enough tocrush any building in its path. It was reached by a trap door in themiddle of the floor, from which a ladder led down into the small, darkhole.When Dorothy stood in the doorway and looked around, she could seenothing but the great gray prairie on every side. Not a tree nor ahouse broke the broad sweep of flat country that reached to the edge ofthe sky in all directions. The sun had baked the plowed land into agray mass, with little cracks running through it. Even the grass wasnot green, for the sun had burned the tops of the long blades untilthey were the same gray color to be seen everywhere. Once the house hadbeen painted, but the sun blistered the paint and the rains washed itaway, and now the house was as dull and gray as everything else.When Aunt Em came there to live she was a young, pretty wife. The sunand wind had changed her, too. They had taken the sparkle from her eyesand left them a sober gray; they had taken the red from her cheeks andlips, and they were gray also. She was thin and gaunt, and never smilednow. When Dorothy, who was an orphan, first came to her, Aunt Em hadbeen so startled by the child’s laughter that she would scream andpress her hand upon her heart whenever Dorothy’s merry voice reachedher ears; and she still looked at the little girl with wonder that shecould find anything to laugh at.Uncle Henry never laughed. He worked hard from morning till night anddid not know what joy was. He was gray also, from his long beard to hisrough boots, and he looked stern and solemn, and rarely spoke.It was Toto that made Dorothy laugh, and saved her from growing as grayas her other surroundings. Toto was not gray; he was a little blackdog, with long silky hair and small black eyes that twinkled merrily oneither side of his funny, wee nose. Toto played all day long, andDorothy played with him, and loved him dearly.Today, however, they were not playing. Uncle Henry sat upon thedoorstep and looked anxiously at the sky, which was even grayer thanusual. Dorothy stood in the door with Toto in her arms, and looked atthe sky too. Aunt Em was washing the dishes.From the far north they heard a low wail of the wind, and Uncle Henryand Dorothy could see where the long grass bowed in waves before thecoming storm. There now came a sharp whistling in the air from thesouth, and as they turned their eyes that way they saw ripples in thegrass coming from that direction also.Suddenly Uncle Henry stood up.“There’s a cyclone coming, Em,” he called to his wife. “I’ll go lookafter the stock.” Then he ran toward the sheds where the cows andhorses were kept.Aunt Em dropped her work and came to the door. One glance told her ofthe danger close at hand.“Quick, Dorothy!” she screamed. “Run for the cellar!”Toto jumped out of Dorothy’s arms and hid under the bed, and the girlstarted to get him. Aunt Em, badly frightened, threw open the trap doorin the floor and climbed down the ladder into the small, dark hole.Dorothy caught Toto at last and started to follow her aunt. When shewas halfway across the room there came a great shriek from the wind,and the house shook so hard that she lost her footing and sat downsuddenly upon the floor.Then a strange thing happened.The house whirled around two or three times and rose slowly through theair. Dorothy felt as if she were going up in a balloon.The north and south winds met where the house stood, and made it theexact center of the cyclone. In the middle of a cyclone the air isgenerally still, but the great pressure of the wind on every side ofthe house raised it up higher and higher, until it was at the very topof the cyclone; and there it remained and was carried miles and milesaway as easily as you could carry a feather.It was very dark, and the wind howled horribly around her, but Dorothyfound she was riding quite easily. After the first few whirls around,and one other time when the house tipped badly, she felt as if she werebeing rocked gently, like a baby in a cradle.Toto did not like it. He ran about the room, now here, now there,barking loudly; but Dorothy sat quite still on the floor and waited tosee what would happen.Once Toto got too near the open trap door, and fell in; and at firstthe little girl thought she had lost him. But soon she saw one of hisears sticking up through the hole, for the strong pressure of the airwas keeping him up so that he could not fall. She crept to the hole,caught Toto by the ear, and dragged him into the room again, afterwardclosing the trap door so that no more accidents could happen.Hour after hour passed away, and slowly Dorothy got over her fright;but she felt quite lonely, and the wind shrieked so loudly all abouther that she nearly became deaf. At first she had wondered if she wouldbe dashed to pieces when the house fell again; but as the hours passedand nothing terrible happened, she stopped worrying and resolved towait calmly and see what the future would bring. At last she crawledover the swaying floor to her bed, and lay down upon it; and Totofollowed and lay down beside her.In spite of the swaying of the house and the wailing of the wind,Dorothy soon closed her eyes and fell fast asleep.Chapter IIThe Council with the MunchkinsShe was awakened by a shock, so sudden and severe that if Dorothy hadnot been lying on the soft bed she might have been hurt. As it was, thejar made her catch her breath and wonder what had happened; and Totoput his cold little nose into her face and whined dismally. Dorothy satup and noticed that the house was not moving; nor was it dark, for thebright sunshine came in at the window, flooding the little room. Shesprang from her bed and with Toto at her heels ran and opened the door.The little girl gave a cry of amazement and looked about her, her eyesgrowing bigger and bigger at the wonderful sights she saw.The cyclone had set the house down very gently—for a cyclone—in themidst of a country of marvelous beauty. There were lovely patches ofgreensward all about, with stately trees bearing rich and lusciousfruits. Banks of gorgeous flowers were on every hand, and birds withrare and brilliant plumage sang and fluttered in the trees and bushes.A little way off was a small brook, rushing and sparkling along betweengreen banks, and murmuring in a voice very grateful to a little girlwho had lived so long on the dry, gray prairies.While she stood looking eagerly at the strange and beautiful sights,she noticed coming toward her a group of the queerest people she hadever seen. They were not as big as the grown folk she had always beenused to; but neither were they very small. In fact, they seemed aboutas tall as Dorothy, who was a well-grown child for her age, althoughthey were, so far as looks go, many years older.Three were men and one a woman, and all were oddly dressed. They woreround hats that rose to a small point a foot above their heads, withlittle bells around the brims that tinkled sweetly as they moved. Thehats of the men were blue; the little woman’s hat was white, and shewore a white gown that hung in pleats from her shoulders. Over it weresprinkled little stars that glistened in the sun like diamonds. The menwere dressed in blue, of the same shade as their hats, and worewell-polished boots with a deep roll of blue at the tops. The men,Dorothy thought, were about as old as Uncle Henry, for two of them hadbeards. But the little woman was doubtless much older. Her face wascovered with wrinkles, her hair was nearly white, and she walked ratherstiffly.When these people drew near the house where Dorothy was standing in thedoorway, they paused and whispered among themselves, as if afraid tocome farther. But the little old woman walked up to Dorothy, made a lowbow and said, in a sweet voice:“You are welcome, most noble Sorceress, to the land of the Munchkins.We are so grateful to you for having killed the Wicked Witch of theEast, and for setting our people free from bondage.”Dorothy listened to this speech with wonder. What could the littlewoman possibly mean by calling her a sorceress, and saying she hadkilled the Wicked Witch of the East? Dorothy was an innocent, harmlesslittle girl, who had been carried by a cyclone many miles from home;and she had never killed anything in all her life.But the little woman evidently expected her to answer; so Dorothy said,with hesitation, “You are very kind, but there must be some mistake. Ihave not killed anything.”“Your house did, anyway,” replied the little old woman, with a laugh,“and that is the same thing. See!” she continued, pointing to thecorner of the house. “There are her two feet, still sticking out fromunder a block of wood.”Dorothy looked, and gave a little cry of fright. There, indeed, justunder the corner of the great beam the house rested on, two feet weresticking out, shod in silver shoes with pointed toes.“Oh, dear! Oh, dear!” cried Dorothy, clasping her hands together indismay. “The house must have fallen on her. Whatever shall we do?”“There is nothing to be done,” said the little woman calmly.“But who was she?” asked Dorothy.“She was the Wicked Witch of the East, as I said,” answered the littlewoman. “She has held all the Munchkins in bondage for many years,making them slave for her night and day. Now they are all set free, andare grateful to you for the favor.”“Who are the Munchkins?” inquired Dorothy.“They are the people who live in this land of the East where the WickedWitch ruled.”“Are you a Munchkin?” asked Dorothy.“No, but I am their friend, although I live in the land of the North.When they saw the Witch of the East was dead the Munchkins sent a swiftmessenger to me, and I came at once. I am the Witch of the North.”“Oh, gracious!” cried Dorothy. “Are you a real witch?”“Yes, indeed,” answered the little woman. “But I am a good witch, andthe people love me. I am not as powerful as the Wicked Witch was whoruled here, or I should have set the people free myself.”“But I thought all witches were wicked,” said the girl, who was halffrightened at facing a real witch. “Oh, no, that is a great mistake.There were only four witches in all the Land of Oz, and two of them,those who live in the North and the South, are good witches. I knowthis is true, for I am one of them myself, and cannot be mistaken.Those who dwelt in the East and the West were, indeed, wicked witches;but now that you have killed one of them, there is but one Wicked Witchin all the Land of Oz—the one who lives in the West.”“But,” said Dorothy, after a moment’s thought, “Aunt Em has told methat the witches were all dead—years and years ago.”“Who is Aunt Em?” inquired the little old woman.“She is my aunt who lives in Kansas, where I came from.”The Witch of the North seemed to think for a time, with her head bowedand her eyes upon the ground. Then she looked up and said, “I do notknow where Kansas is, for I have never heard that country mentionedbefore. But tell me, is it a civilized country?”“Oh, yes,” replied Dorothy.“Then that accounts for it. In the civilized countries I believe thereare no witches left, nor wizards, nor sorceresses, nor magicians. But,you see, the Land of Oz has never been civilized, for we are cut offfrom all the rest of the world. Therefore we still have witches andwizards amongst us.”“Who are the wizards?” asked Dorothy.“Oz himself is the Great Wizard,” answered the Witch, sinking her voiceto a whisper. “He is more powerful than all the rest of us together. Helives in the City of Emeralds.”Dorothy was going to ask another question, but just then the Munchkins,who had been standing silently by, gave a loud shout and pointed to thecorner of the house where the Wicked Witch had been lying.“What is it?” asked the little old woman, and looked, and began tolaugh. The feet of the dead Witch had disappeared entirely, and nothingwas left but the silver shoes.“She was so old,” explained the Witch of the North, “that she dried upquickly in the sun. That is the end of her. But the silver shoes areyours, and you shall have them to wear.” She reached down and picked upthe shoes, and after shaking the dust out of them handed them toDorothy.“The Witch of the East was proud of those silver shoes,” said one ofthe Munchkins, “and there is some charm connected with them; but whatit is we never knew.”Dorothy carried the shoes into the house and placed them on the table.Then she came out again to the Munchkins and said:“I am anxious to get back to my aunt and uncle, for I am sure they willworry about me. Can you help me find my way?”The Munchkins and the Witch first looked at one another, and then atDorothy, and then shook their heads.“At the East, not far from here,” said one, “there is a great desert,and none could live to cross it.”“It is the same at the South,” said another, “for I have been there andseen it. The South is the country of the Quadlings.”“I am told,” said the third man, “that it is the same at the West. Andthat country, where the Winkies live, is ruled by the Wicked Witch ofthe West, who would make you her slave if you passed her way.”“The North is my home,” said the old lady, “and at its edge is the samegreat desert that surrounds this Land of Oz. I’m afraid, my dear, youwill have to live with us.”Dorothy began to sob at this, for she felt lonely among all thesestrange people. Her tears seemed to grieve the kind-hearted Munchkins,for they immediately took out their handkerchiefs and began to weepalso. As for the little old woman, she took off her cap and balancedthe point on the end of her nose, while she counted “One, two, three”in a solemn voice. At once the cap changed to a slate, on which waswritten in big, white chalk marks:“LET DOROTHY GO TO THE CITY OF EMERALDS”The little old woman took the slate from her nose, and having read thewords on it, asked, “Is your name Dorothy, my dear?”“Yes,” answered the child, looking up and drying her tears.“Then you must go to the City of Emeralds. Perhaps Oz will help you.”“Where is this city?” asked Dorothy.“It is exactly in the center of the country, and is ruled by Oz, theGreat Wizard I told you of.”“Is he a good man?” inquired the girl anxiously.“He is a good Wizard. Whether he is a man or not I cannot tell, for Ihave never seen him.”“How can I get there?” asked Dorothy.“You must walk. It is a long journey, through a country that issometimes pleasant and sometimes dark and terrible. However, I will useall the magic arts I know of to keep you from harm.”“Won’t you go with me?” pleaded the girl, who had begun to look uponthe little old woman as her only friend.“No, I cannot do that,” she replied, “but I will give you my kiss, andno one will dare injure a person who has been kissed by the Witch ofthe North.”She came close to Dorothy and kissed her gently on the forehead. Whereher lips touched the girl they left a round, shining mark, as Dorothyfound out soon after.“The road to the City of Emeralds is paved with yellow brick,” said theWitch, “so you cannot miss it. When you get to Oz do not be afraid ofhim, but tell your story and ask him to help you. Good-bye, my dear.”The three Munchkins bowed low to her and wished her a pleasant journey,after which they walked away through the trees. The Witch gave Dorothya friendly little nod, whirled around on her left heel three times, andstraightway disappeared, much to the surprise of little Toto, whobarked after her loudly enough when she had gone, because he had beenafraid even to growl while she stood by.But Dorothy, knowing her to be a witch, had expected her to disappearin just that way, and was not surprised in the least.Chapter IIIHow Dorothy Saved the ScarecrowWhen Dorothy was left alone she began to feel hungry. So she went tothe cupboard and cut herself some bread, which she spread with butter.She gave some to Toto, and taking a pail from the shelf she carried itdown to the little brook and filled it with clear, sparkling water.Toto ran over to the trees and began to bark at the birds sittingthere. Dorothy went to get him, and saw such delicious fruit hangingfrom the branches that she gathered some of it, finding it just whatshe wanted to help out her breakfast.Then she went back to the house, and having helped herself and Toto toa good drink of the cool, clear water, she set about making ready forthe journey to the City of Emeralds.Dorothy had only one other dress, but that happened to be clean and washanging on a peg beside her bed. It was gingham, with checks of whiteand blue; and although the blue was somewhat faded with many washings,it was still a pretty frock. The girl washed herself carefully, dressedherself in the clean gingham, and tied her pink sunbonnet on her head.She took a little basket and filled it with bread from the cupboard,laying a white cloth over the top. Then she looked down at her feet andnoticed how old and worn her shoes were.“They surely will never do for a long journey, Toto,” she said. AndToto looked up into her face with his little black eyes and wagged histail to show he knew what she meant.At that moment Dorothy saw lying on the table the silver shoes that hadbelonged to the Witch of the East.“I wonder if they will fit me,” she said to Toto. “They would be justthe thing to take a long walk in, for they could not wear out.”She took off her old leather shoes and tried on the silver ones, whichfitted her as well as if they had been made for her.Finally she picked up her basket.“Come along, Toto,” she said. “We will go to the Emerald City and askthe Great Oz how to get back to Kansas again.”She closed the door, locked it, and put the key carefully in the pocketof her dress. And so, with Toto trotting along soberly behind her, shestarted on her journey.There were several roads nearby, but it did not take her long to findthe one paved with yellow bricks. Within a short time she was walkingbriskly toward the Emerald City, her silver shoes tinkling merrily onthe hard, yellow road-bed. The sun shone bright and the birds sangsweetly, and Dorothy did not feel nearly so bad as you might think alittle girl would who had been suddenly whisked away from her owncountry and set down in the midst of a strange land.She was surprised, as she walked along, to see how pretty the countrywas about her. There were neat fences at the sides of the road, painteda dainty blue color, and beyond them were fields of grain andvegetables in abundance. Evidently the Munchkins were good farmers andable to raise large crops. Once in a while she would pass a house, andthe people came out to look at her and bow low as she went by; foreveryone knew she had been the means of destroying the Wicked Witch andsetting them free from bondage. The houses of the Munchkins wereodd-looking dwellings, for each was round, with a big dome for a roof.All were painted blue, for in this country of the East blue was thefavorite color.Toward evening, when Dorothy was tired with her long walk and began towonder where she should pass the night, she came to a house ratherlarger than the rest. On the green lawn before it many men and womenwere dancing. Five little fiddlers played as loudly as possible, andthe people were laughing and singing, while a big table near by wasloaded with delicious fruits and nuts, pies and cakes, and many othergood things to eat.The people greeted Dorothy kindly, and invited her to supper and topass the night with them; for this was the home of one of the richestMunchkins in the land, and his friends were gathered with him tocelebrate their freedom from the bondage of the Wicked Witch.Dorothy ate a hearty supper and was waited upon by the rich Munchkinhimself, whose name was Boq. Then she sat upon a settee and watched thepeople dance.When Boq saw her silver shoes he said, “You must be a great sorceress.”“Why?” asked the girl.“Because you wear silver shoes and have killed the Wicked Witch.Besides, you have white in your frock, and only witches and sorceresseswear white.”“My dress is blue and white checked,” said Dorothy, smoothing out thewrinkles in it.“It is kind of you to wear that,” said Boq. “Blue is the color of theMunchkins, and white is the witch color. So we know you are a friendlywitch.”Dorothy did not know what to say to this, for all the people seemed tothink her a witch, and she knew very well she was only an ordinarylittle girl who had come by the chance of a cyclone into a strangeland.When she had tired watching the dancing, Boq led her into the house,where he gave her a room with a pretty bed in it. The sheets were madeof blue cloth, and Dorothy slept soundly in them till morning, withToto curled up on the blue rug beside her.She ate a hearty breakfast, and watched a wee Munchkin baby, who playedwith Toto and pulled his tail and crowed and laughed in a way thatgreatly amused Dorothy. Toto was a fine curiosity to all the people,for they had never seen a dog before.“How far is it to the Emerald City?” the girl asked.“I do not know,” answered Boq gravely, “for I have never been there. Itis better for people to keep away from Oz, unless they have businesswith him. But it is a long way to the Emerald City, and it will takeyou many days. The country here is rich and pleasant, but you must passthrough rough and dangerous places before you reach the end of yourjourney.”This worried Dorothy a little, but she knew that only the Great Ozcould help her get to Kansas again, so she bravely resolved not to turnback.She bade her friends good-bye, and again started along the road ofyellow brick. When she had gone several miles she thought she wouldstop to rest, and so climbed to the top of the fence beside the roadand sat down. There was a great cornfield beyond the fence, and not faraway she saw a Scarecrow, placed high on a pole to keep the birds fromthe ripe corn.Dorothy leaned her chin upon her hand and gazed thoughtfully at theScarecrow. Its head was a small sack stuffed with straw, with eyes,nose, and mouth painted on it to represent a face. An old, pointed bluehat, that had belonged to some Munchkin, was perched on his head, andthe rest of the figure was a blue suit of clothes, worn and faded,which had also been stuffed with straw. On the feet were some old bootswith blue tops, such as every man wore in this country, and the figurewas raised above the stalks of corn by means of the pole stuck up itsback.While Dorothy was looking earnestly into the queer, painted face of theScarecrow, she was surprised to see one of the eyes slowly wink at her.She thought she must have been mistaken at first, for none of thescarecrows in Kansas ever wink; but presently the figure nodded itshead to her in a friendly way. Then she climbed down from the fence andwalked up to it, while Toto ran around the pole and barked.“Good day,” said the Scarecrow, in a rather husky voice.“Did you speak?” asked the girl, in wonder.“Certainly,” answered the Scarecrow. “How do you do?”“I’m pretty well, thank you,” replied Dorothy politely. “How do youdo?”“I’m not feeling well,” said the Scarecrow, with a smile, “for it isvery tedious being perched up here night and day to scare away crows.”“Can’t you get down?” asked Dorothy.“No, for this pole is stuck up my back. If you will please take awaythe pole I shall be greatly obliged to you.”Dorothy reached up both arms and lifted the figure off the pole, for,being stuffed with straw, it was quite light.“Thank you very much,” said the Scarecrow, when he had been set down onthe ground. “I feel like a new man.”Dorothy was puzzled at this, for it sounded queer to hear a stuffed manspeak, and to see him bow and walk along beside her.“Who are you?” asked the Scarecrow when he had stretched himself andyawned. “And where are you going?”“My name is Dorothy,” said the girl, “and I am going to the EmeraldCity, to ask the Great Oz to send me back to Kansas.”“Where is the Emerald City?” he inquired. “And who is Oz?”“Why, don’t you know?” she returned, in surprise.“No, indeed. I don’t know anything. You see, I am stuffed, so I have nobrains at all,” he answered sadly.“Oh,” said Dorothy, “I’m awfully sorry for you.”“Do you think,” he asked, “if I go to the Emerald City with you, thatOz would give me some brains?”“I cannot tell,” she returned, “but you may come with me, if you like.If Oz will not give you any brains you will be no worse off than youare now.”“That is true,” said the Scarecrow. “You see,” he continuedconfidentially, “I don’t mind my legs and arms and body being stuffed,because I cannot get hurt. If anyone treads on my toes or sticks a pininto me, it doesn’t matter, for I can’t feel it. But I do not wantpeople to call me a fool, and if my head stays stuffed with strawinstead of with brains, as yours is, how am I ever to know anything?”“I understand how you feel,” said the little girl, who was truly sorryfor him. “If you will come with me I’ll ask Oz to do all he can foryou.”“Thank you,” he answered gratefully.They walked back to the road. Dorothy helped him over the fence, andthey started along the path of yellow brick for the Emerald City.Toto did not like this addition to the party at first. He smelledaround the stuffed man as if he suspected there might be a nest of ratsin the straw, and he often growled in an unfriendly way at theScarecrow.“Don’t mind Toto,” said Dorothy to her new friend. “He never bites.”“Oh, I’m not afraid,” replied the Scarecrow. “He can’t hurt the straw.Do let me carry that basket for you. I shall not mind it, for I can’tget tired. I’ll tell you a secret,” he continued, as he walked along.“There is only one thing in the world I am afraid of.”“What is that?” asked Dorothy; “the Munchkin farmer who made you?”“No,” answered the Scarecrow; “it’s a lighted match.”Chapter IVThe Road Through the ForestAfter a few hours the road began to be rough, and the walking grew sodifficult that the Scarecrow often stumbled over the yellow bricks,which were here very uneven. Sometimes, indeed, they were broken ormissing altogether, leaving holes that Toto jumped across and Dorothywalked around. As for the Scarecrow, having no brains, he walkedstraight ahead, and so stepped into the holes and fell at full lengthon the hard bricks. It never hurt him, however, and Dorothy would pickhim up and set him upon his feet again, while he joined her in laughingmerrily at his own mishap.The farms were not nearly so well cared for here as they were fartherback. There were fewer houses and fewer fruit trees, and the fartherthey went the more dismal and lonesome the country became.At noon they sat down by the roadside, near a little brook, and Dorothyopened her basket and got out some bread. She offered a piece to theScarecrow, but he refused.“I am never hungry,” he said, “and it is a lucky thing I am not, for mymouth is only painted, and if I should cut a hole in it so I could eat,the straw I am stuffed with would come out, and that would spoil theshape of my head.”Dorothy saw at once that this was true, so she only nodded and went oneating her bread.“Tell me something about yourself and the country you came from,” saidthe Scarecrow, when she had finished her dinner. So she told him allabout Kansas, and how gray everything was there, and how the cyclonehad carried her to this queer Land of Oz.The Scarecrow listened carefully, and said, “I cannot understand whyyou should wish to leave this beautiful country and go back to the dry,gray place you call Kansas.”“That is because you have no brains” answered the girl. “No matter howdreary and gray our homes are, we people of flesh and blood wouldrather live there than in any other country, be it ever so beautiful.There is no place like home.”The Scarecrow sighed.“Of course I cannot understand it,” he said. “If your heads werestuffed with straw, like mine, you would probably all live in thebeautiful places, and then Kansas would have no people at all. It isfortunate for Kansas that you have brains.”“Won’t you tell me a story, while we are resting?” asked the child.The Scarecrow looked at her reproachfully, and answered:“My life has been so short that I really know nothing whatever. I wasonly made day before yesterday. What happened in the world before thattime is all unknown to me. Luckily, when the farmer made my head, oneof the first things he did was to paint my ears, so that I heard whatwas going on. There was another Munchkin with him, and the first thingI heard was the farmer saying, ‘How do you like those ears?’“‘They aren’t straight,’” answered the other.“‘Never mind,’” said the farmer. “‘They are ears just the same,’” whichwas true enough.“‘Now I’ll make the eyes,’” said the farmer. So he painted my righteye, and as soon as it was finished I found myself looking at him andat everything around me with a great deal of curiosity, for this was myfirst glimpse of the world.“‘That’s a rather pretty eye,’” remarked the Munchkin who was watchingthe farmer. “‘Blue paint is just the color for eyes.’“‘I think I’ll make the other a little bigger,’” said the farmer. Andwhen the second eye was done I could see much better than before. Thenhe made my nose and my mouth. But I did not speak, because at that timeI didn’t know what a mouth was for. I had the fun of watching them makemy body and my arms and legs; and when they fastened on my head, atlast, I felt very proud, for I thought I was just as good a man asanyone.“‘This fellow will scare the crows fast enough,’ said the farmer. ‘Helooks just like a man.’“‘Why, he is a man,’ said the other, and I quite agreed with him. Thefarmer carried me under his arm to the cornfield, and set me up on atall stick, where you found me. He and his friend soon after walkedaway and left me alone.“I did not like to be deserted this way. So I tried to walk after them.But my feet would not touch the ground, and I was forced to stay onthat pole. It was a lonely life to lead, for I had nothing to think of,having been made such a little while before. Many crows and other birdsflew into the cornfield, but as soon as they saw me they flew awayagain, thinking I was a Munchkin; and this pleased me and made me feelthat I was quite an important person. By and by an old crow flew nearme, and after looking at me carefully he perched upon my shoulder andsaid:“‘I wonder if that farmer thought to fool me in this clumsy manner. Anycrow of sense could see that you are only stuffed with straw.’ Then hehopped down at my feet and ate all the corn he wanted. The other birds,seeing he was not harmed by me, came to eat the corn too, so in a shorttime there was a great flock of them about me.“I felt sad at this, for it showed I was not such a good Scarecrowafter all; but the old crow comforted me, saying, ‘If you only hadbrains in your head you would be as good a man as any of them, and abetter man than some of them. Brains are the only things worth havingin this world, no matter whether one is a crow or a man.’“After the crows had gone I thought this over, and decided I would tryhard to get some brains. By good luck you came along and pulled me offthe stake, and from what you say I am sure the Great Oz will give mebrains as soon as we get to the Emerald City.”“I hope so,” said Dorothy earnestly, “since you seem anxious to havethem.”“Oh, yes; I am anxious,” returned the Scarecrow. “It is such anuncomfortable feeling to know one is a fool.”“Well,” said the girl, “let us go.” And she handed the basket to theScarecrow.There were no fences at all by the roadside now, and the land was roughand untilled. Toward evening they came to a great forest, where thetrees grew so big and close together that their branches met over theroad of yellow brick. It was almost dark under the trees, for thebranches shut out the daylight; but the travelers did not stop, andwent on into the forest.“If this road goes in, it must come out,” said the Scarecrow, “and asthe Emerald City is at the other end of the road, we must go whereverit leads us.”“Anyone would know that,” said Dorothy.“Certainly; that is why I know it,” returned the Scarecrow. “If itrequired brains to figure it out, I never should have said it.”After an hour or so the light faded away, and they found themselvesstumbling along in the darkness. Dorothy could not see at all, but Totocould, for some dogs see very well in the dark; and the Scarecrowdeclared he could see as well as by day. So she took hold of his armand managed to get along fairly well.“If you see any house, or any place where we can pass the night,” shesaid, “you must tell me; for it is very uncomfortable walking in thedark.”Soon after the Scarecrow stopped.“I see a little cottage at the right of us,” he said, “built of logsand branches. Shall we go there?”“Yes, indeed,” answered the child. “I am all tired out.”So the Scarecrow led her through the trees until they reached thecottage, and Dorothy entered and found a bed of dried leaves in onecorner. She lay down at once, and with Toto beside her soon fell into asound sleep. The Scarecrow, who was never tired, stood up in anothercorner and waited patiently until morning came.Chapter VThe Rescue of the Tin WoodmanWhen Dorothy awoke the sun was shining through the trees and Toto hadlong been out chasing birds around him and squirrels. She sat up andlooked around her. There was the Scarecrow, still standing patiently inhis corner, waiting for her.“We must go and search for water,” she said to him.“Why do you want water?” he asked.“To wash my face clean after the dust of the road, and to drink, so thedry bread will not stick in my throat.”“It must be inconvenient to be made of flesh,” said the Scarecrowthoughtfully, “for you must sleep, and eat and drink. However, you havebrains, and it is worth a lot of bother to be able to think properly.”They left the cottage and walked through the trees until they found alittle spring of clear water, where Dorothy drank and bathed and ateher breakfast. She saw there was not much bread left in the basket, andthe girl was thankful the Scarecrow did not have to eat anything, forthere was scarcely enough for herself and Toto for the day.When she had finished her meal, and was about to go back to the road ofyellow brick, she was startled to hear a deep groan near by.“What was that?” she asked timidly.“I cannot imagine,” replied the Scarecrow; “but we can go and see.”Just then another groan reached their ears, and the sound seemed tocome from behind them. They turned and walked through the forest a fewsteps, when Dorothy discovered something shining in a ray of sunshinethat fell between the trees. She ran to the place and then stoppedshort, with a little cry of surprise.One of the big trees had been partly chopped through, and standingbeside it, with an uplifted axe in his hands, was a man made entirelyof tin. His head and arms and legs were jointed upon his body, but hestood perfectly motionless, as if he could not stir at all.Dorothy looked at him in amazement, and so did the Scarecrow, whileToto barked sharply and made a snap at the tin legs, which hurt histeeth.“Did you groan?” asked Dorothy.“Yes,” answered the tin man, “I did. I’ve been groaning for more than ayear, and no one has ever heard me before or come to help me.”“What can I do for you?” she inquired softly, for she was moved by thesad voice in which the man spoke.“Get an oil-can and oil my joints,” he answered. “They are rusted sobadly that I cannot move them at all; if I am well oiled I shall soonbe all right again. You will find an oil-can on a shelf in my cottage.”Dorothy at once ran back to the cottage and found the oil-can, and thenshe returned and asked anxiously, “Where are your joints?”“Oil my neck, first,” replied the Tin Woodman. So she oiled it, and asit was quite badly rusted the Scarecrow took hold of the tin head andmoved it gently from side to side until it worked freely, and then theman could turn it himself.“Now oil the joints in my arms,” he said. And Dorothy oiled them andthe Scarecrow bent them carefully until they were quite free from rustand as good as new.The Tin Woodman gave a sigh of satisfaction and lowered his axe, whichhe leaned against the tree.“This is a great comfort,” he said. “I have been holding that axe inthe air ever since I rusted, and I’m glad to be able to put it down atlast. Now, if you will oil the joints of my legs, I shall be all rightonce more.”So they oiled his legs until he could move them freely; and he thankedthem again and again for his release, for he seemed a very politecreature, and very grateful.“I might have stood there always if you had not come along,” he said;“so you have certainly saved my life. How did you happen to be here?”“We are on our way to the Emerald City to see the Great Oz,” sheanswered, “and we stopped at your cottage to pass the night.”“Why do you wish to see Oz?” he asked.“I want him to send me back to Kansas, and the Scarecrow wants him toput a few brains into his head,” she replied.The Tin Woodman appeared to think deeply for a moment. Then he said:“Do you suppose Oz could give me a heart?”“Why, I guess so,” Dorothy answered. “It would be as easy as to givethe Scarecrow brains.”“True,” the Tin Woodman returned. “So, if you will allow me to joinyour party, I will also go to the Emerald City and ask Oz to help me.”“Come along,” said the Scarecrow heartily, and Dorothy added that shewould be pleased to have his company. So the Tin Woodman shouldered hisaxe and they all passed through the forest until they came to the roadthat was paved with yellow brick.The Tin Woodman had asked Dorothy to put the oil-can in her basket.“For,” he said, “if I should get caught in the rain, and rust again, Iwould need the oil-can badly.”It was a bit of good luck to have their new comrade join the party, forsoon after they had begun their journey again they came to a placewhere the trees and branches grew so thick over the road that thetravelers could not pass. But the Tin Woodman set to work with his axeand chopped so well that soon he cleared a passage for the entireparty.Dorothy was thinking so earnestly as they walked along that she did notnotice when the Scarecrow stumbled into a hole and rolled over to theside of the road. Indeed he was obliged to call to her to help him upagain.“Why didn’t you walk around the hole?” asked the Tin Woodman.“I don’t know enough,” replied the Scarecrow cheerfully. “My head isstuffed with straw, you know, and that is why I am going to Oz to askhim for some brains.”“Oh, I see,” said the Tin Woodman. “But, after all, brains are not thebest things in the world.”“Have you any?” inquired the Scarecrow.“No, my head is quite empty,” answered the Woodman. “But once I hadbrains, and a heart also; so, having tried them both, I should muchrather have a heart.”“And why is that?” asked the Scarecrow.“I will tell you my story, and then you will know.”So, while they were walking through the forest, the Tin Woodman toldthe following story:“I was born the son of a woodman who chopped down trees in the forestand sold the wood for a living. When I grew up, I too became awoodchopper, and after my father died I took care of my old mother aslong as she lived. Then I made up my mind that instead of living aloneI would marry, so that I might not become lonely.“There was one of the Munchkin girls who was so beautiful that I soongrew to love her with all my heart. She, on her part, promised to marryme as soon as I could earn enough money to build a better house forher; so I set to work harder than ever. But the girl lived with an oldwoman who did not want her to marry anyone, for she was so lazy shewished the girl to remain with her and do the cooking and thehousework. So the old woman went to the Wicked Witch of the East, andpromised her two sheep and a cow if she would prevent the marriage.Thereupon the Wicked Witch enchanted my axe, and when I was choppingaway at my best one day, for I was anxious to get the new house and mywife as soon as possible, the axe slipped all at once and cut off myleft leg.“This at first seemed a great misfortune, for I knew a one-legged mancould not do very well as a wood-chopper. So I went to a tinsmith andhad him make me a new leg out of tin. The leg worked very well, once Iwas used to it. But my action angered the Wicked Witch of the East, forshe had promised the old woman I should not marry the pretty Munchkingirl. When I began chopping again, my axe slipped and cut off my rightleg. Again I went to the tinsmith, and again he made me a leg out oftin. After this the enchanted axe cut off my arms, one after the other;but, nothing daunted, I had them replaced with tin ones. The WickedWitch then made the axe slip and cut off my head, and at first Ithought that was the end of me. But the tinsmith happened to comealong, and he made me a new head out of tin.“I thought I had beaten the Wicked Witch then, and I worked harder thanever; but I little knew how cruel my enemy could be. She thought of anew way to kill my love for the beautiful Munchkin maiden, and made myaxe slip again, so that it cut right through my body, splitting me intotwo halves. Once more the tinsmith came to my help and made me a bodyof tin, fastening my tin arms and legs and head to it, by means ofjoints, so that I could move around as well as ever. But, alas! I hadnow no heart, so that I lost all my love for the Munchkin girl, and didnot care whether I married her or not. I suppose she is still livingwith the old woman, waiting for me to come after her.“My body shone so brightly in the sun that I felt very proud of it andit did not matter now if my axe slipped, for it could not cut me. Therewas only one danger—that my joints would rust; but I kept an oil-can inmy cottage and took care to oil myself whenever I needed it. However,there came a day when I forgot to do this, and, being caught in arainstorm, before I thought of the danger my joints had rusted, and Iwas left to stand in the woods until you came to help me. It was aterrible thing to undergo, but during the year I stood there I had timeto think that the greatest loss I had known was the loss of my heart.While I was in love I was the happiest man on earth; but no one canlove who has not a heart, and so I am resolved to ask Oz to give meone. If he does, I will go back to the Munchkin maiden and marry her.”Both Dorothy and the Scarecrow had been greatly interested in the storyof the Tin Woodman, and now they knew why he was so anxious to get anew heart.“All the same,” said the Scarecrow, “I shall ask for brains instead ofa heart; for a fool would not know what to do with a heart if he hadone.”“I shall take the heart,” returned the Tin Woodman; “for brains do notmake one happy, and happiness is the best thing in the world.”Dorothy did not say anything, for she was puzzled to know which of hertwo friends was right, and she decided if she could only get back toKansas and Aunt Em, it did not matter so much whether the Woodman hadno brains and the Scarecrow no heart, or each got what he wanted.What worried her most was that the bread was nearly gone, and anothermeal for herself and Toto would empty the basket. To be sure, neitherthe Woodman nor the Scarecrow ever ate anything, but she was not madeof tin nor straw, and could not live unless she was fed.Chapter VIThe Cowardly LionAll this time Dorothy and her companions had been walking through thethick woods. The road was still paved with yellow brick, but these weremuch covered by dried branches and dead leaves from the trees, and thewalking was not at all good.There were few birds in this part of the forest, for birds love theopen country where there is plenty of sunshine. But now and then therecame a deep growl from some wild animal hidden among the trees. Thesesounds made the little girl’s heart beat fast, for she did not knowwhat made them; but Toto knew, and he walked close to Dorothy’s side,and did not even bark in return.“How long will it be,” the child asked of the Tin Woodman, “before weare out of the forest?”“I cannot tell,” was the answer, “for I have never been to the EmeraldCity. But my father went there once, when I was a boy, and he said itwas a long journey through a dangerous country, although nearer to thecity where Oz dwells the country is beautiful. But I am not afraid solong as I have my oil-can, and nothing can hurt the Scarecrow, whileyou bear upon your forehead the mark of the Good Witch’s kiss, and thatwill protect you from harm.”“But Toto!” said the girl anxiously. “What will protect him?”“We must protect him ourselves if he is in danger,” replied the TinWoodman.Just as he spoke there came from the forest a terrible roar, and thenext moment a great Lion bounded into the road. With one blow of hispaw he sent the Scarecrow spinning over and over to the edge of theroad, and then he struck at the Tin Woodman with his sharp claws. But,to the Lion’s surprise, he could make no impression on the tin,although the Woodman fell over in the road and lay still.Little Toto, now that he had an enemy to face, ran barking toward theLion, and the great beast had opened his mouth to bite the dog, whenDorothy, fearing Toto would be killed, and heedless of danger, rushedforward and slapped the Lion upon his nose as hard as she could, whileshe cried out:“Don’t you dare to bite Toto! You ought to be ashamed of yourself, abig beast like you, to bite a poor little dog!”“I didn’t bite him,” said the Lion, as he rubbed his nose with his pawwhere Dorothy had hit it.“No, but you tried to,” she retorted. “You are nothing but a bigcoward.”“I know it,” said the Lion, hanging his head in shame. “I’ve alwaysknown it. But how can I help it?”“I don’t know, I’m sure. To think of your striking a stuffed man, likethe poor Scarecrow!”“Is he stuffed?” asked the Lion in surprise, as he watched her pick upthe Scarecrow and set him upon his feet, while she patted him intoshape again.“Of course he’s stuffed,” replied Dorothy, who was still angry.“That’s why he went over so easily,” remarked the Lion. “It astonishedme to see him whirl around so. Is the other one stuffed also?”“No,” said Dorothy, “he’s made of tin.” And she helped the Woodman upagain.“That’s why he nearly blunted my claws,” said the Lion. “When theyscratched against the tin it made a cold shiver run down my back. Whatis that little animal you are so tender of?”“He is my dog, Toto,” answered Dorothy.“Is he made of tin, or stuffed?” asked the Lion.“Neither. He’s a—a—a meat dog,” said the girl.“Oh! He’s a curious animal and seems remarkably small, now that I lookat him. No one would think of biting such a little thing, except acoward like me,” continued the Lion sadly.“What makes you a coward?” asked Dorothy, looking at the great beast inwonder, for he was as big as a small horse.“It’s a mystery,” replied the Lion. “I suppose I was born that way. Allthe other animals in the forest naturally expect me to be brave, forthe Lion is everywhere thought to be the King of Beasts. I learned thatif I roared very loudly every living thing was frightened and got outof my way. Whenever I’ve met a man I’ve been awfully scared; but I justroared at him, and he has always run away as fast as he could go. Ifthe elephants and the tigers and the bears had ever tried to fight me,I should have run myself—I’m such a coward; but just as soon as theyhear me roar they all try to get away from me, and of course I let themgo.”“But that isn’t right. The King of Beasts shouldn’t be a coward,” saidthe Scarecrow.“I know it,” returned the Lion, wiping a tear from his eye with the tipof his tail. “It is my great sorrow, and makes my life very unhappy.But whenever there is danger, my heart begins to beat fast.”“Perhaps you have heart disease,” said the Tin Woodman.“It may be,” said the Lion.“If you have,” continued the Tin Woodman, “you ought to be glad, for itproves you have a heart. For my part, I have no heart; so I cannot haveheart disease.”“Perhaps,” said the Lion thoughtfully, “if I had no heart I should notbe a coward.”“Have you brains?” asked the Scarecrow.“I suppose so. I’ve never looked to see,” replied the Lion.“I am going to the Great Oz to ask him to give me some,” remarked theScarecrow, “for my head is stuffed with straw.”“And I am going to ask him to give me a heart,” said the Woodman.“And I am going to ask him to send Toto and me back to Kansas,” addedDorothy.“Do you think Oz could give me courage?” asked the Cowardly Lion.“Just as easily as he could give me brains,” said the Scarecrow.“Or give me a heart,” said the Tin Woodman.“Or send me back to Kansas,” said Dorothy.“Then, if you don’t mind, I’ll go with you,” said the Lion, “for mylife is simply unbearable without a bit of courage.”“You will be very welcome,” answered Dorothy, “for you will help tokeep away the other wild beasts. It seems to me they must be morecowardly than you are if they allow you to scare them so easily.”“They really are,” said the Lion, “but that doesn’t make me any braver,and as long as I know myself to be a coward I shall be unhappy.”So once more the little company set off upon the journey, the Lionwalking with stately strides at Dorothy’s side. Toto did not approve ofthis new comrade at first, for he could not forget how nearly he hadbeen crushed between the Lion’s great jaws. But after a time he becamemore at ease, and presently Toto and the Cowardly Lion had grown to begood friends.During the rest of that day there was no other adventure to mar thepeace of their journey. Once, indeed, the Tin Woodman stepped upon abeetle that was crawling along the road, and killed the poor littlething. This made the Tin Woodman very unhappy, for he was alwayscareful not to hurt any living creature; and as he walked along he weptseveral tears of sorrow and regret. These tears ran slowly down hisface and over the hinges of his jaw, and there they rusted. WhenDorothy presently asked him a question the Tin Woodman could not openhis mouth, for his jaws were tightly rusted together. He became greatlyfrightened at this and made many motions to Dorothy to relieve him, butshe could not understand. The Lion was also puzzled to know what waswrong. But the Scarecrow seized the oil-can from Dorothy’s basket andoiled the Woodman’s jaws, so that after a few moments he could talk aswell as before.“This will serve me a lesson,” said he, “to look where I step. For if Ishould kill another bug or beetle I should surely cry again, and cryingrusts my jaws so that I cannot speak.”Thereafter he walked very carefully, with his eyes on the road, andwhen he saw a tiny ant toiling by he would step over it, so as not toharm it. The Tin Woodman knew very well he had no heart, and thereforehe took great care never to be cruel or unkind to anything.“You people with hearts,” he said, “have something to guide you, andneed never do wrong; but I have no heart, and so I must be verycareful. When Oz gives me a heart of course I needn’t mind so much.”Chapter VIIThe Journey to the Great OzThey were obliged to camp out that night under a large tree in theforest, for there were no houses near. The tree made a good, thickcovering to protect them from the dew, and the Tin Woodman chopped agreat pile of wood with his axe and Dorothy built a splendid fire thatwarmed her and made her feel less lonely. She and Toto ate the last oftheir bread, and now she did not know what they would do for breakfast.“If you wish,” said the Lion, “I will go into the forest and kill adeer for you. You can roast it by the fire, since your tastes are sopeculiar that you prefer cooked food, and then you will have a verygood breakfast.”“Don’t! Please don’t,” begged the Tin Woodman. “I should certainly weepif you killed a poor deer, and then my jaws would rust again.”But the Lion went away into the forest and found his own supper, and noone ever knew what it was, for he didn’t mention it. And the Scarecrowfound a tree full of nuts and filled Dorothy’s basket with them, sothat she would not be hungry for a long time. She thought this was verykind and thoughtful of the Scarecrow, but she laughed heartily at theawkward way in which the poor creature picked up the nuts. His paddedhands were so clumsy and the nuts were so small that he dropped almostas many as he put in the basket. But the Scarecrow did not mind howlong it took him to fill the basket, for it enabled him to keep awayfrom the fire, as he feared a spark might get into his straw and burnhim up. So he kept a good distance away from the flames, and only camenear to cover Dorothy with dry leaves when she lay down to sleep. Thesekept her very snug and warm, and she slept soundly until morning.When it was daylight, the girl bathed her face in a little ripplingbrook, and soon after they all started toward the Emerald City.This was to be an eventful day for the travelers. They had hardly beenwalking an hour when they saw before them a great ditch that crossedthe road and divided the forest as far as they could see on eitherside. It was a very wide ditch, and when they crept up to the edge andlooked into it they could see it was also very deep, and there weremany big, jagged rocks at the bottom. The sides were so steep that noneof them could climb down, and for a moment it seemed that their journeymust end.“What shall we do?” asked Dorothy despairingly.“I haven’t the faintest idea,” said the Tin Woodman, and the Lion shookhis shaggy mane and looked thoughtful.But the Scarecrow said, “We cannot fly, that is certain. Neither can weclimb down into this great ditch. Therefore, if we cannot jump over it,we must stop where we are.”“I think I could jump over it,” said the Cowardly Lion, after measuringthe distance carefully in his mind.“Then we are all right,” answered the Scarecrow, “for you can carry usall over on your back, one at a time.”“Well, I’ll try it,” said the Lion. “Who will go first?”“I will,” declared the Scarecrow, “for, if you found that you could notjump over the gulf, Dorothy would be killed, or the Tin Woodman badlydented on the rocks below. But if I am on your back it will not matterso much, for the fall would not hurt me at all.”“I am terribly afraid of falling, myself,” said the Cowardly Lion, “butI suppose there is nothing to do but try it. So get on my back and wewill make the attempt.”The Scarecrow sat upon the Lion’s back, and the big beast walked to theedge of the gulf and crouched down.“Why don’t you run and jump?” asked the Scarecrow.“Because that isn’t the way we Lions do these things,” he replied. Thengiving a great spring, he shot through the air and landed safely on theother side. They were all greatly pleased to see how easily he did it,and after the Scarecrow had got down from his back the Lion sprangacross the ditch again.Dorothy thought she would go next; so she took Toto in her arms andclimbed on the Lion’s back, holding tightly to his mane with one hand.The next moment it seemed as if she were flying through the air; andthen, before she had time to think about it, she was safe on the otherside. The Lion went back a third time and got the Tin Woodman, and thenthey all sat down for a few moments to give the beast a chance to rest,for his great leaps had made his breath short, and he panted like a bigdog that has been running too long.They found the forest very thick on this side, and it looked dark andgloomy. After the Lion had rested they started along the road of yellowbrick, silently wondering, each in his own mind, if ever they wouldcome to the end of the woods and reach the bright sunshine again. Toadd to their discomfort, they soon heard strange noises in the depthsof the forest, and the Lion whispered to them that it was in this partof the country that the Kalidahs lived.“What are the Kalidahs?” asked the girl.“They are monstrous beasts with bodies like bears and heads liketigers,” replied the Lion, “and with claws so long and sharp that theycould tear me in two as easily as I could kill Toto. I’m terriblyafraid of the Kalidahs.”“I’m not surprised that you are,” returned Dorothy. “They must bedreadful beasts.”The Lion was about to reply when suddenly they came to another gulfacross the road. But this one was so broad and deep that the Lion knewat once he could not leap across it.So they sat down to consider what they should do, and after seriousthought the Scarecrow said:“Here is a great tree, standing close to the ditch. If the Tin Woodmancan chop it down, so that it will fall to the other side, we can walkacross it easily.”“That is a first-rate idea,” said the Lion. “One would almost suspectyou had brains in your head, instead of straw.”The Woodman set to work at once, and so sharp was his axe that the treewas soon chopped nearly through. Then the Lion put his strong frontlegs against the tree and pushed with all his might, and slowly the bigtree tipped and fell with a crash across the ditch, with its topbranches on the other side.They had just started to cross this queer bridge when a sharp growlmade them all look up, and to their horror they saw running toward themtwo great beasts with bodies like bears and heads like tigers.“They are the Kalidahs!” said the Cowardly Lion, beginning to tremble.“Quick!” cried the Scarecrow. “Let us cross over.”So Dorothy went first, holding Toto in her arms, the Tin Woodmanfollowed, and the Scarecrow came next. The Lion, although he wascertainly afraid, turned to face the Kalidahs, and then he gave so loudand terrible a roar that Dorothy screamed and the Scarecrow fell overbackward, while even the fierce beasts stopped short and looked at himin surprise.But, seeing they were bigger than the Lion, and remembering that therewere two of them and only one of him, the Kalidahs again rushedforward, and the Lion crossed over the tree and turned to see what theywould do next. Without stopping an instant the fierce beasts also beganto cross the tree. And the Lion said to Dorothy:“We are lost, for they will surely tear us to pieces with their sharpclaws. But stand close behind me, and I will fight them as long as I amalive.”“Wait a minute!” called the Scarecrow. He had been thinking what wasbest to be done, and now he asked the Woodman to chop away the end ofthe tree that rested on their side of the ditch. The Tin Woodman beganto use his axe at once, and, just as the two Kalidahs were nearlyacross, the tree fell with a crash into the gulf, carrying the ugly,snarling brutes with it, and both were dashed to pieces on the sharprocks at the bottom.“Well,” said the Cowardly Lion, drawing a long breath of relief, “I seewe are going to live a little while longer, and I am glad of it, for itmust be a very uncomfortable thing not to be alive. Those creaturesfrightened me so badly that my heart is beating yet.”“Ah,” said the Tin Woodman sadly, “I wish I had a heart to beat.”This adventure made the travelers more anxious than ever to get out ofthe forest, and they walked so fast that Dorothy became tired, and hadto ride on the Lion’s back. To their great joy the trees became thinnerthe farther they advanced, and in the afternoon they suddenly came upona broad river, flowing swiftly just before them. On the other side ofthe water they could see the road of yellow brick running through abeautiful country, with green meadows dotted with bright flowers andall the road bordered with trees hanging full of delicious fruits. Theywere greatly pleased to see this delightful country before them.“How shall we cross the river?” asked Dorothy.“That is easily done,” replied the Scarecrow. “The Tin Woodman mustbuild us a raft, so we can float to the other side.”So the Woodman took his axe and began to chop down small trees to makea raft, and while he was busy at this the Scarecrow found on theriverbank a tree full of fine fruit. This pleased Dorothy, who hadeaten nothing but nuts all day, and she made a hearty meal of the ripefruit.But it takes time to make a raft, even when one is as industrious anduntiring as the Tin Woodman, and when night came the work was not done.So they found a cozy place under the trees where they slept well untilthe morning; and Dorothy dreamed of the Emerald City, and of the goodWizard Oz, who would soon send her back to her own home again.Chapter VIIIThe Deadly Poppy FieldOur little party of travelers awakened the next morning refreshed andfull of hope, and Dorothy breakfasted like a princess off peaches andplums from the trees beside the river. Behind them was the dark forestthey had passed safely through, although they had suffered manydiscouragements; but before them was a lovely, sunny country thatseemed to beckon them on to the Emerald City.To be sure, the broad river now cut them off from this beautiful land.But the raft was nearly done, and after the Tin Woodman had cut a fewmore logs and fastened them together with wooden pins, they were readyto start. Dorothy sat down in the middle of the raft and held Toto inher arms. When the Cowardly Lion stepped upon the raft it tipped badly,for he was big and heavy; but the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman stoodupon the other end to steady it, and they had long poles in their handsto push the raft through the water.They got along quite well at first, but when they reached the middle ofthe river the swift current swept the raft downstream, farther andfarther away from the road of yellow brick. And the water grew so deepthat the long poles would not touch the bottom.“This is bad,” said the Tin Woodman, “for if we cannot get to the landwe shall be carried into the country of the Wicked Witch of the West,and she will enchant us and make us her slaves.”“And then I should get no brains,” said the Scarecrow.“And I should get no courage,” said the Cowardly Lion.“And I should get no heart,” said the Tin Woodman.“And I should never get back to Kansas,” said Dorothy.“We must certainly get to the Emerald City if we can,” the Scarecrowcontinued, and he pushed so hard on his long pole that it stuck fast inthe mud at the bottom of the river. Then, before he could pull it outagain—or let go—the raft was swept away, and the poor Scarecrow wasleft clinging to the pole in the middle of the river.“Good-bye!” he called after them, and they were very sorry to leavehim. Indeed, the Tin Woodman began to cry, but fortunately rememberedthat he might rust, and so dried his tears on Dorothy’s apron.Of course this was a bad thing for the Scarecrow.“I am now worse off than when I first met Dorothy,” he thought. “Then,I was stuck on a pole in a cornfield, where I could make-believe scarethe crows, at any rate. But surely there is no use for a Scarecrowstuck on a pole in the middle of a river. I am afraid I shall neverhave any brains, after all!”Down the stream the raft floated, and the poor Scarecrow was left farbehind. Then the Lion said:“Something must be done to save us. I think I can swim to the shore andpull the raft after me, if you will only hold fast to the tip of mytail.”So he sprang into the water, and the Tin Woodman caught fast hold ofhis tail. Then the Lion began to swim with all his might toward theshore. It was hard work, although he was so big; but by and by theywere drawn out of the current, and then Dorothy took the Tin Woodman’slong pole and helped push the raft to the land.They were all tired out when they reached the shore at last and steppedoff upon the pretty green grass, and they also knew that the stream hadcarried them a long way past the road of yellow brick that led to theEmerald City.“What shall we do now?” asked the Tin Woodman, as the Lion lay down onthe grass to let the sun dry him.“We must get back to the road, in some way,” said Dorothy.“The best plan will be to walk along the riverbank until we come to theroad again,” remarked the Lion.So, when they were rested, Dorothy picked up her basket and theystarted along the grassy bank, to the road from which the river hadcarried them. It was a lovely country, with plenty of flowers and fruittrees and sunshine to cheer them, and had they not felt so sorry forthe poor Scarecrow, they could have been very happy.They walked along as fast as they could, Dorothy only stopping once topick a beautiful flower; and after a time the Tin Woodman cried out:“Look!”Then they all looked at the river and saw the Scarecrow perched uponhis pole in the middle of the water, looking very lonely and sad.“What can we do to save him?” asked Dorothy.The Lion and the Woodman both shook their heads, for they did not know.So they sat down upon the bank and gazed wistfully at the Scarecrowuntil a Stork flew by, who, upon seeing them, stopped to rest at thewater’s edge.“Who are you and where are you going?” asked the Stork.“I am Dorothy,” answered the girl, “and these are my friends, the TinWoodman and the Cowardly Lion; and we are going to the Emerald City.”“This isn’t the road,” said the Stork, as she twisted her long neck andlooked sharply at the queer party.“I know it,” returned Dorothy, “but we have lost the Scarecrow, and arewondering how we shall get him again.”“Where is he?” asked the Stork.“Over there in the river,” answered the little girl.“If he wasn’t so big and heavy I would get him for you,” remarked theStork.“He isn’t heavy a bit,” said Dorothy eagerly, “for he is stuffed withstraw; and if you will bring him back to us, we shall thank you everand ever so much.”“Well, I’ll try,” said the Stork, “but if I find he is too heavy tocarry I shall have to drop him in the river again.”So the big bird flew into the air and over the water till she came towhere the Scarecrow was perched upon his pole. Then the Stork with hergreat claws grabbed the Scarecrow by the arm and carried him up intothe air and back to the bank, where Dorothy and the Lion and the TinWoodman and Toto were sitting.When the Scarecrow found himself among his friends again, he was sohappy that he hugged them all, even the Lion and Toto; and as theywalked along he sang “Tol-de-ri-de-oh!” at every step, he felt so gay.“I was afraid I should have to stay in the river forever,” he said,“but the kind Stork saved me, and if I ever get any brains I shall findthe Stork again and do her some kindness in return.”“That’s all right,” said the Stork, who was flying along beside them.“I always like to help anyone in trouble. But I must go now, for mybabies are waiting in the nest for me. I hope you will find the EmeraldCity and that Oz will help you.”“Thank you,” replied Dorothy, and then the kind Stork flew into the airand was soon out of sight.They walked along listening to the singing of the brightly coloredbirds and looking at the lovely flowers which now became so thick thatthe ground was carpeted with them. There were big yellow and white andblue and purple blossoms, besides great clusters of scarlet poppies,which were so brilliant in color they almost dazzled Dorothy’s eyes.“Aren’t they beautiful?” the girl asked, as she breathed in the spicyscent of the bright flowers.“I suppose so,” answered the Scarecrow. “When I have brains, I shallprobably like them better.”“If I only had a heart, I should love them,” added the Tin Woodman.“I always did like flowers,” said the Lion. “They seem so helpless andfrail. But there are none in the forest so bright as these.”They now came upon more and more of the big scarlet poppies, and fewerand fewer of the other flowers; and soon they found themselves in themidst of a great meadow of poppies. Now it is well known that whenthere are many of these flowers together their odor is so powerful thatanyone who breathes it falls asleep, and if the sleeper is not carriedaway from the scent of the flowers, he sleeps on and on forever. ButDorothy did not know this, nor could she get away from the bright redflowers that were everywhere about; so presently her eyes grew heavyand she felt she must sit down to rest and to sleep.But the Tin Woodman would not let her do this.“We must hurry and get back to the road of yellow brick before dark,”he said; and the Scarecrow agreed with him. So they kept walking untilDorothy could stand no longer. Her eyes closed in spite of herself andshe forgot where she was and fell among the poppies, fast asleep.“What shall we do?” asked the Tin Woodman.“If we leave her here she will die,” said the Lion. “The smell of theflowers is killing us all. I myself can scarcely keep my eyes open, andthe dog is asleep already.”It was true; Toto had fallen down beside his little mistress. But theScarecrow and the Tin Woodman, not being made of flesh, were nottroubled by the scent of the flowers.“Run fast,” said the Scarecrow to the Lion, “and get out of this deadlyflower bed as soon as you can. We will bring the little girl with us,but if you should fall asleep you are too big to be carried.”So the Lion aroused himself and bounded forward as fast as he could go.In a moment he was out of sight.“Let us make a chair with our hands and carry her,” said the Scarecrow.So they picked up Toto and put the dog in Dorothy’s lap, and then theymade a chair with their hands for the seat and their arms for the armsand carried the sleeping girl between them through the flowers.On and on they walked, and it seemed that the great carpet of deadlyflowers that surrounded them would never end. They followed the bend ofthe river, and at last came upon their friend the Lion, lying fastasleep among the poppies. The flowers had been too strong for the hugebeast and he had given up at last, and fallen only a short distancefrom the end of the poppy bed, where the sweet grass spread inbeautiful green fields before them.“We can do nothing for him,” said the Tin Woodman, sadly; “for he ismuch too heavy to lift. We must leave him here to sleep on forever, andperhaps he will dream that he has found courage at last.”“I’m sorry,” said the Scarecrow. “The Lion was a very good comrade forone so cowardly. But let us go on.”They carried the sleeping girl to a pretty spot beside the river, farenough from the poppy field to prevent her breathing any more of thepoison of the flowers, and here they laid her gently on the soft grassand waited for the fresh breeze to waken her.Chapter IXThe Queen of the Field Mice“We cannot be far from the road of yellow brick, now,” remarked theScarecrow, as he stood beside the girl, “for we have come nearly as faras the river carried us away.”The Tin Woodman was about to reply when he heard a low growl, andturning his head (which worked beautifully on hinges) he saw a strangebeast come bounding over the grass toward them. It was, indeed, a greatyellow Wildcat, and the Woodman thought it must be chasing something,for its ears were lying close to its head and its mouth was wide open,showing two rows of ugly teeth, while its red eyes glowed like balls offire. As it came nearer the Tin Woodman saw that running before thebeast was a little gray field mouse, and although he had no heart heknew it was wrong for the Wildcat to try to kill such a pretty,harmless creature.So the Woodman raised his axe, and as the Wildcat ran by he gave it aquick blow that cut the beast’s head clean off from its body, and itrolled over at his feet in two pieces.The field mouse, now that it was freed from its enemy, stopped short;and coming slowly up to the Woodman it said, in a squeaky little voice:“Oh, thank you! Thank you ever so much for saving my life.”“Don’t speak of it, I beg of you,” replied the Woodman. “I have noheart, you know, so I am careful to help all those who may need afriend, even if it happens to be only a mouse.”“Only a mouse!” cried the little animal, indignantly. “Why, I am aQueen—the Queen of all the Field Mice!”“Oh, indeed,” said the Woodman, making a bow.“Therefore you have done a great deed, as well as a brave one, insaving my life,” added the Queen.At that moment several mice were seen running up as fast as theirlittle legs could carry them, and when they saw their Queen theyexclaimed:“Oh, your Majesty, we thought you would be killed! How did you manageto escape the great Wildcat?” They all bowed so low to the little Queenthat they almost stood upon their heads.“This funny tin man,” she answered, “killed the Wildcat and saved mylife. So hereafter you must all serve him, and obey his slightestwish.”“We will!” cried all the mice, in a shrill chorus. And then theyscampered in all directions, for Toto had awakened from his sleep, andseeing all these mice around him he gave one bark of delight and jumpedright into the middle of the group. Toto had always loved to chase micewhen he lived in Kansas, and he saw no harm in it.But the Tin Woodman caught the dog in his arms and held him tight,while he called to the mice, “Come back! Come back! Toto shall not hurtyou.”At this the Queen of the Mice stuck her head out from underneath aclump of grass and asked, in a timid voice, “Are you sure he will notbite us?”“I will not let him,” said the Woodman; “so do not be afraid.”One by one the mice came creeping back, and Toto did not bark again,although he tried to get out of the Woodman’s arms, and would havebitten him had he not known very well he was made of tin. Finally oneof the biggest mice spoke.“Is there anything we can do,” it asked, “to repay you for saving thelife of our Queen?”“Nothing that I know of,” answered the Woodman; but the Scarecrow, whohad been trying to think, but could not because his head was stuffedwith straw, said, quickly, “Oh, yes; you can save our friend, theCowardly Lion, who is asleep in the poppy bed.”“A Lion!” cried the little Queen. “Why, he would eat us all up.”“Oh, no,” declared the Scarecrow; “this Lion is a coward.”“Really?” asked the Mouse.“He says so himself,” answered the Scarecrow, “and he would never hurtanyone who is our friend. If you will help us to save him I promisethat he shall treat you all with kindness.”“Very well,” said the Queen, “we trust you. But what shall we do?”“Are there many of these mice which call you Queen and are willing toobey you?”“Oh, yes; there are thousands,” she replied.“Then send for them all to come here as soon as possible, and let eachone bring a long piece of string.”The Queen turned to the mice that attended her and told them to go atonce and get all her people. As soon as they heard her orders they ranaway in every direction as fast as possible.“Now,” said the Scarecrow to the Tin Woodman, “you must go to thosetrees by the riverside and make a truck that will carry the Lion.”So the Woodman went at once to the trees and began to work; and he soonmade a truck out of the limbs of trees, from which he chopped away allthe leaves and branches. He fastened it together with wooden pegs andmade the four wheels out of short pieces of a big tree trunk. So fastand so well did he work that by the time the mice began to arrive thetruck was all ready for them.They came from all directions, and there were thousands of them: bigmice and little mice and middle-sized mice; and each one brought apiece of string in his mouth. It was about this time that Dorothy wokefrom her long sleep and opened her eyes. She was greatly astonished tofind herself lying upon the grass, with thousands of mice standingaround and looking at her timidly. But the Scarecrow told her abouteverything, and turning to the dignified little Mouse, he said:“Permit me to introduce to you her Majesty, the Queen.”Dorothy nodded gravely and the Queen made a curtsy, after which shebecame quite friendly with the little girl.The Scarecrow and the Woodman now began to fasten the mice to thetruck, using the strings they had brought. One end of a string was tiedaround the neck of each mouse and the other end to the truck. Of coursethe truck was a thousand times bigger than any of the mice who were todraw it; but when all the mice had been harnessed, they were able topull it quite easily. Even the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman could siton it, and were drawn swiftly by their queer little horses to the placewhere the Lion lay asleep.After a great deal of hard work, for the Lion was heavy, they managedto get him up on the truck. Then the Queen hurriedly gave her peoplethe order to start, for she feared if the mice stayed among the poppiestoo long they also would fall asleep.At first the little creatures, many though they were, could hardly stirthe heavily loaded truck; but the Woodman and the Scarecrow both pushedfrom behind, and they got along better. Soon they rolled the Lion outof the poppy bed to the green fields, where he could breathe the sweet,fresh air again, instead of the poisonous scent of the flowers.Dorothy came to meet them and thanked the little mice warmly for savingher companion from death. She had grown so fond of the big Lion she wasglad he had been rescued.Then the mice were unharnessed from the truck and scampered awaythrough the grass to their homes. The Queen of the Mice was the last toleave.“If ever you need us again,” she said, “come out into the field andcall, and we shall hear you and come to your assistance. Good-bye!”“Good-bye!” they all answered, and away the Queen ran, while Dorothyheld Toto tightly lest he should run after her and frighten her.After this they sat down beside the Lion until he should awaken; andthe Scarecrow brought Dorothy some fruit from a tree near by, which sheate for her dinner.Chapter XThe Guardian of the GateIt was some time before the Cowardly Lion awakened, for he had lainamong the poppies a long while, breathing in their deadly fragrance;but when he did open his eyes and roll off the truck he was very gladto find himself still alive.“I ran as fast as I could,” he said, sitting down and yawning, “but theflowers were too strong for me. How did you get me out?”Then they told him of the field mice, and how they had generously savedhim from death; and the Cowardly Lion laughed, and said:“I have always thought myself very big and terrible; yet such littlethings as flowers came near to killing me, and such small animals asmice have saved my life. How strange it all is! But, comrades, whatshall we do now?”“We must journey on until we find the road of yellow brick again,” saidDorothy, “and then we can keep on to the Emerald City.”So, the Lion being fully refreshed, and feeling quite himself again,they all started upon the journey, greatly enjoying the walk throughthe soft, fresh grass; and it was not long before they reached the roadof yellow brick and turned again toward the Emerald City where theGreat Oz dwelt.The road was smooth and well paved, now, and the country about wasbeautiful, so that the travelers rejoiced in leaving the forest farbehind, and with it the many dangers they had met in its gloomy shades.Once more they could see fences built beside the road; but these werepainted green, and when they came to a small house, in which a farmerevidently lived, that also was painted green. They passed by several ofthese houses during the afternoon, and sometimes people came to thedoors and looked at them as if they would like to ask questions; but noone came near them nor spoke to them because of the great Lion, ofwhich they were very much afraid. The people were all dressed inclothing of a lovely emerald-green color and wore peaked hats likethose of the Munchkins.“This must be the Land of Oz,” said Dorothy, “and we are surely gettingnear the Emerald City.”“Yes,” answered the Scarecrow. “Everything is green here, while in thecountry of the Munchkins blue was the favorite color. But the people donot seem to be as friendly as the Munchkins, and I’m afraid we shall beunable to find a place to pass the night.”“I should like something to eat besides fruit,” said the girl, “and I’msure Toto is nearly starved. Let us stop at the next house and talk tothe people.”So, when they came to a good-sized farmhouse, Dorothy walked boldly upto the door and knocked.A woman opened it just far enough to look out, and said, “What do youwant, child, and why is that great Lion with you?”“We wish to pass the night with you, if you will allow us,” answeredDorothy; “and the Lion is my friend and comrade, and would not hurt youfor the world.”“Is he tame?” asked the woman, opening the door a little wider.“Oh, yes,” said the girl, “and he is a great coward, too. He will bemore afraid of you than you are of him.”“Well,” said the woman, after thinking it over and taking another peepat the Lion, “if that is the case you may come in, and I will give yousome supper and a place to sleep.”So they all entered the house, where there were, besides the woman, twochildren and a man. The man had hurt his leg, and was lying on thecouch in a corner. They seemed greatly surprised to see so strange acompany, and while the woman was busy laying the table the man asked:“Where are you all going?”“To the Emerald City,” said Dorothy, “to see the Great Oz.”“Oh, indeed!” exclaimed the man. “Are you sure that Oz will see you?”“Why not?” she replied.“Why, it is said that he never lets anyone come into his presence. Ihave been to the Emerald City many times, and it is a beautiful andwonderful place; but I have never been permitted to see the Great Oz,nor do I know of any living person who has seen him.”“Does he never go out?” asked the Scarecrow.“Never. He sits day after day in the great Throne Room of his Palace,and even those who wait upon him do not see him face to face.”“What is he like?” asked the girl.“That is hard to tell,” said the man thoughtfully. “You see, Oz is aGreat Wizard, and can take on any form he wishes. So that some say helooks like a bird; and some say he looks like an elephant; and some sayhe looks like a cat. To others he appears as a beautiful fairy, or abrownie, or in any other form that pleases him. But who the real Oz is,when he is in his own form, no living person can tell.”“That is very strange,” said Dorothy, “but we must try, in some way, tosee him, or we shall have made our journey for nothing.”“Why do you wish to see the terrible Oz?” asked the man.“I want him to give me some brains,” said the Scarecrow eagerly.“Oh, Oz could do that easily enough,” declared the man. “He has morebrains than he needs.”“And I want him to give me a heart,” said the Tin Woodman.“That will not trouble him,” continued the man, “for Oz has a largecollection of hearts, of all sizes and shapes.”“And I want him to give me courage,” said the Cowardly Lion.“Oz keeps a great pot of courage in his Throne Room,” said the man,“which he has covered with a golden plate, to keep it from runningover. He will be glad to give you some.”“And I want him to send me back to Kansas,” said Dorothy.“Where is Kansas?” asked the man, with surprise.“I don’t know,” replied Dorothy sorrowfully, “but it is my home, andI’m sure it’s somewhere.”“Very likely. Well, Oz can do anything; so I suppose he will findKansas for you. But first you must get to see him, and that will be ahard task; for the Great Wizard does not like to see anyone, and heusually has his own way. But what do YOU want?” he continued, speakingto Toto. Toto only wagged his tail; for, strange to say, he could notspeak.The woman now called to them that supper was ready, so they gatheredaround the table and Dorothy ate some delicious porridge and a dish ofscrambled eggs and a plate of nice white bread, and enjoyed her meal.The Lion ate some of the porridge, but did not care for it, saying itwas made from oats and oats were food for horses, not for lions. TheScarecrow and the Tin Woodman ate nothing at all. Toto ate a little ofeverything, and was glad to get a good supper again.The woman now gave Dorothy a bed to sleep in, and Toto lay down besideher, while the Lion guarded the door of her room so she might not bedisturbed. The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman stood up in a corner andkept quiet all night, although of course they could not sleep.The next morning, as soon as the sun was up, they started on their way,and soon saw a beautiful green glow in the sky just before them.“That must be the Emerald City,” said Dorothy.As they walked on, the green glow became brighter and brighter, and itseemed that at last they were nearing the end of their travels. Yet itwas afternoon before they came to the great wall that surrounded theCity. It was high and thick and of a bright green color.In front of them, and at the end of the road of yellow brick, was a biggate, all studded with emeralds that glittered so in the sun that eventhe painted eyes of the Scarecrow were dazzled by their brilliancy.There was a bell beside the gate, and Dorothy pushed the button andheard a silvery tinkle sound within. Then the big gate swung slowlyopen, and they all passed through and found themselves in a high archedroom, the walls of which glistened with countless emeralds.Before them stood a little man about the same size as the Munchkins. Hewas clothed all in green, from his head to his feet, and even his skinwas of a greenish tint. At his side was a large green box.When he saw Dorothy and her companions the man asked, “What do you wishin the Emerald City?”“We came here to see the Great Oz,” said Dorothy.The man was so surprised at this answer that he sat down to think itover.“It has been many years since anyone asked me to see Oz,” he said,shaking his head in perplexity. “He is powerful and terrible, and ifyou come on an idle or foolish errand to bother the wise reflections ofthe Great Wizard, he might be angry and destroy you all in an instant.”“But it is not a foolish errand, nor an idle one,” replied theScarecrow; “it is important. And we have been told that Oz is a goodWizard.”“So he is,” said the green man, “and he rules the Emerald City wiselyand well. But to those who are not honest, or who approach him fromcuriosity, he is most terrible, and few have ever dared ask to see hisface. I am the Guardian of the Gates, and since you demand to see theGreat Oz I must take you to his Palace. But first you must put on thespectacles.”“Why?” asked Dorothy.“Because if you did not wear spectacles the brightness and glory of theEmerald City would blind you. Even those who live in the City must wearspectacles night and day. They are all locked on, for Oz so ordered itwhen the City was first built, and I have the only key that will unlockthem.”He opened the big box, and Dorothy saw that it was filled withspectacles of every size and shape. All of them had green glasses inthem. The Guardian of the Gates found a pair that would just fitDorothy and put them over her eyes. There were two golden bandsfastened to them that passed around the back of her head, where theywere locked together by a little key that was at the end of a chain theGuardian of the Gates wore around his neck. When they were on, Dorothycould not take them off had she wished, but of course she did not wishto be blinded by the glare of the Emerald City, so she said nothing.Then the green man fitted spectacles for the Scarecrow and the TinWoodman and the Lion, and even on little Toto; and all were locked fastwith the key.Then the Guardian of the Gates put on his own glasses and told them hewas ready to show them to the Palace. Taking a big golden key from apeg on the wall, he opened another gate, and they all followed himthrough the portal into the streets of the Emerald City.Chapter XIThe Wonderful City of OzEven with eyes protected by the green spectacles, Dorothy and herfriends were at first dazzled by the brilliancy of the wonderful City.The streets were lined with beautiful houses all built of green marbleand studded everywhere with sparkling emeralds. They walked over apavement of the same green marble, and where the blocks were joinedtogether were rows of emeralds, set closely, and glittering in thebrightness of the sun. The window panes were of green glass; even thesky above the City had a green tint, and the rays of the sun weregreen.There were many people—men, women, and children—walking about, andthese were all dressed in green clothes and had greenish skins. Theylooked at Dorothy and her strangely assorted company with wonderingeyes, and the children all ran away and hid behind their mothers whenthey saw the Lion; but no one spoke to them. Many shops stood in thestreet, and Dorothy saw that everything in them was green. Green candyand green pop corn were offered for sale, as well as green shoes, greenhats, and green clothes of all sorts. At one place a man was sellinggreen lemonade, and when the children bought it Dorothy could see thatthey paid for it with green pennies.There seemed to be no horses nor animals of any kind; the men carriedthings around in little green carts, which they pushed before them.Everyone seemed happy and contented and prosperous.The Guardian of the Gates led them through the streets until they cameto a big building, exactly in the middle of the City, which was thePalace of Oz, the Great Wizard. There was a soldier before the door,dressed in a green uniform and wearing a long green beard.“Here are strangers,” said the Guardian of the Gates to him, “and theydemand to see the Great Oz.”“Step inside,” answered the soldier, “and I will carry your message tohim.”So they passed through the Palace Gates and were led into a big roomwith a green carpet and lovely green furniture set with emeralds. Thesoldier made them all wipe their feet upon a green mat before enteringthis room, and when they were seated he said politely:“Please make yourselves comfortable while I go to the door of theThrone Room and tell Oz you are here.”They had to wait a long time before the soldier returned. When, atlast, he came back, Dorothy asked:“Have you seen Oz?”“Oh, no,” returned the soldier; “I have never seen him. But I spoke tohim as he sat behind his screen and gave him your message. He said hewill grant you an audience, if you so desire; but each one of you mustenter his presence alone, and he will admit but one each day.Therefore, as you must remain in the Palace for several days, I willhave you shown to rooms where you may rest in comfort after yourjourney.”“Thank you,” replied the girl; “that is very kind of Oz.”The soldier now blew upon a green whistle, and at once a young girl,dressed in a pretty green silk gown, entered the room. She had lovelygreen hair and green eyes, and she bowed low before Dorothy as shesaid, “Follow me and I will show you your room.”So Dorothy said good-bye to all her friends except Toto, and taking thedog in her arms followed the green girl through seven passages and upthree flights of stairs until they came to a room at the front of thePalace. It was the sweetest little room in the world, with a softcomfortable bed that had sheets of green silk and a green velvetcounterpane. There was a tiny fountain in the middle of the room, thatshot a spray of green perfume into the air, to fall back into abeautifully carved green marble basin. Beautiful green flowers stood inthe windows, and there was a shelf with a row of little green books.When Dorothy had time to open these books she found them full of queergreen pictures that made her laugh, they were so funny.In a wardrobe were many green dresses, made of silk and satin andvelvet; and all of them fitted Dorothy exactly.“Make yourself perfectly at home,” said the green girl, “and if youwish for anything ring the bell. Oz will send for you tomorrowmorning.”She left Dorothy alone and went back to the others. These she also ledto rooms, and each one of them found himself lodged in a very pleasantpart of the Palace. Of course this politeness was wasted on theScarecrow; for when he found himself alone in his room he stoodstupidly in one spot, just within the doorway, to wait till morning. Itwould not rest him to lie down, and he could not close his eyes; so heremained all night staring at a little spider which was weaving its webin a corner of the room, just as if it were not one of the mostwonderful rooms in the world. The Tin Woodman lay down on his bed fromforce of habit, for he remembered when he was made of flesh; but notbeing able to sleep, he passed the night moving his joints up and downto make sure they kept in good working order. The Lion would havepreferred a bed of dried leaves in the forest, and did not like beingshut up in a room; but he had too much sense to let this worry him, sohe sprang upon the bed and rolled himself up like a cat and purredhimself asleep in a minute.The next morning, after breakfast, the green maiden came to fetchDorothy, and she dressed her in one of the prettiest gowns, made ofgreen brocaded satin. Dorothy put on a green silk apron and tied agreen ribbon around Toto’s neck, and they started for the Throne Roomof the Great Oz.First they came to a great hall in which were many ladies and gentlemenof the court, all dressed in rich costumes. These people had nothing todo but talk to each other, but they always came to wait outside theThrone Room every morning, although they were never permitted to seeOz. As Dorothy entered they looked at her curiously, and one of themwhispered:“Are you really going to look upon the face of Oz the Terrible?”“Of course,” answered the girl, “if he will see me.”“Oh, he will see you,” said the soldier who had taken her message tothe Wizard, “although he does not like to have people ask to see him.Indeed, at first he was angry and said I should send you back where youcame from. Then he asked me what you looked like, and when I mentionedyour silver shoes he was very much interested. At last I told him aboutthe mark upon your forehead, and he decided he would admit you to hispresence.”Just then a bell rang, and the green girl said to Dorothy, “That is thesignal. You must go into the Throne Room alone.”She opened a little door and Dorothy walked boldly through and foundherself in a wonderful place. It was a big, round room with a higharched roof, and the walls and ceiling and floor were covered withlarge emeralds set closely together. In the center of the roof was agreat light, as bright as the sun, which made the emeralds sparkle in awonderful manner.But what interested Dorothy most was the big throne of green marblethat stood in the middle of the room. It was shaped like a chair andsparkled with gems, as did everything else. In the center of the chairwas an enormous Head, without a body to support it or any arms or legswhatever. There was no hair upon this head, but it had eyes and a noseand mouth, and was much bigger than the head of the biggest giant.As Dorothy gazed upon this in wonder and fear, the eyes turned slowlyand looked at her sharply and steadily. Then the mouth moved, andDorothy heard a voice say:“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”It was not such an awful voice as she had expected to come from the bigHead; so she took courage and answered:“I am Dorothy, the Small and Meek. I have come to you for help.”The eyes looked at her thoughtfully for a full minute. Then said thevoice:“Where did you get the silver shoes?”“I got them from the Wicked Witch of the East, when my house fell onher and killed her,” she replied.“Where did you get the mark upon your forehead?” continued the voice.“That is where the Good Witch of the North kissed me when she bade megood-bye and sent me to you,” said the girl.Again the eyes looked at her sharply, and they saw she was telling thetruth. Then Oz asked, “What do you wish me to do?”“Send me back to Kansas, where my Aunt Em and Uncle Henry are,” sheanswered earnestly. “I don’t like your country, although it is sobeautiful. And I am sure Aunt Em will be dreadfully worried over mybeing away so long.”The eyes winked three times, and then they turned up to the ceiling anddown to the floor and rolled around so queerly that they seemed to seeevery part of the room. And at last they looked at Dorothy again.“Why should I do this for you?” asked Oz.“Because you are strong and I am weak; because you are a Great Wizardand I am only a little girl.”“But you were strong enough to kill the Wicked Witch of the East,” saidOz.“That just happened,” returned Dorothy simply; “I could not help it.”“Well,” said the Head, “I will give you my answer. You have no right toexpect me to send you back to Kansas unless you do something for me inreturn. In this country everyone must pay for everything he gets. Ifyou wish me to use my magic power to send you home again you must dosomething for me first. Help me and I will help you.”“What must I do?” asked the girl.“Kill the Wicked Witch of the West,” answered Oz.“But I cannot!” exclaimed Dorothy, greatly surprised.“You killed the Witch of the East and you wear the silver shoes, whichbear a powerful charm. There is now but one Wicked Witch left in allthis land, and when you can tell me she is dead I will send you back toKansas—but not before.”The little girl began to weep, she was so much disappointed; and theeyes winked again and looked upon her anxiously, as if the Great Ozfelt that she could help him if she would.“I never killed anything, willingly,” she sobbed. “Even if I wanted to,how could I kill the Wicked Witch? If you, who are Great and Terrible,cannot kill her yourself, how do you expect me to do it?”“I do not know,” said the Head; “but that is my answer, and until theWicked Witch dies you will not see your uncle and aunt again. Rememberthat the Witch is Wicked—tremendously Wicked—and ought to be killed.Now go, and do not ask to see me again until you have done your task.”Sorrowfully Dorothy left the Throne Room and went back where the Lionand the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were waiting to hear what Oz hadsaid to her. “There is no hope for me,” she said sadly, “for Oz willnot send me home until I have killed the Wicked Witch of the West; andthat I can never do.”Her friends were sorry, but could do nothing to help her; so Dorothywent to her own room and lay down on the bed and cried herself tosleep.The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to theScarecrow and said:“Come with me, for Oz has sent for you.”So the Scarecrow followed him and was admitted into the great ThroneRoom, where he saw, sitting in the emerald throne, a most lovely Lady.She was dressed in green silk gauze and wore upon her flowing greenlocks a crown of jewels. Growing from her shoulders were wings,gorgeous in color and so light that they fluttered if the slightestbreath of air reached them.When the Scarecrow had bowed, as prettily as his straw stuffing wouldlet him, before this beautiful creature, she looked upon him sweetly,and said:“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”Now the Scarecrow, who had expected to see the great Head Dorothy hadtold him of, was much astonished; but he answered her bravely.“I am only a Scarecrow, stuffed with straw. Therefore I have no brains,and I come to you praying that you will put brains in my head insteadof straw, so that I may become as much a man as any other in yourdominions.”“Why should I do this for you?” asked the Lady.“Because you are wise and powerful, and no one else can help me,”answered the Scarecrow.“I never grant favors without some return,” said Oz; “but this much Iwill promise. If you will kill for me the Wicked Witch of the West, Iwill bestow upon you a great many brains, and such good brains that youwill be the wisest man in all the Land of Oz.”“I thought you asked Dorothy to kill the Witch,” said the Scarecrow, insurprise.“So I did. I don’t care who kills her. But until she is dead I will notgrant your wish. Now go, and do not seek me again until you have earnedthe brains you so greatly desire.”The Scarecrow went sorrowfully back to his friends and told them whatOz had said; and Dorothy was surprised to find that the Great Wizardwas not a Head, as she had seen him, but a lovely Lady.“All the same,” said the Scarecrow, “she needs a heart as much as theTin Woodman.”On the next morning the soldier with the green whiskers came to the TinWoodman and said:“Oz has sent for you. Follow me.”So the Tin Woodman followed him and came to the great Throne Room. Hedid not know whether he would find Oz a lovely Lady or a Head, but hehoped it would be the lovely Lady. “For,” he said to himself, “if it isthe head, I am sure I shall not be given a heart, since a head has noheart of its own and therefore cannot feel for me. But if it is thelovely Lady I shall beg hard for a heart, for all ladies are themselvessaid to be kindly hearted.”But when the Woodman entered the great Throne Room he saw neither theHead nor the Lady, for Oz had taken the shape of a most terrible Beast.It was nearly as big as an elephant, and the green throne seemed hardlystrong enough to hold its weight. The Beast had a head like that of arhinoceros, only there were five eyes in its face. There were five longarms growing out of its body, and it also had five long, slim legs.Thick, woolly hair covered every part of it, and a moredreadful-looking monster could not be imagined. It was fortunate theTin Woodman had no heart at that moment, for it would have beat loudand fast from terror. But being only tin, the Woodman was not at allafraid, although he was much disappointed.“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible,” spoke the Beast, in a voice that wasone great roar. “Who are you, and why do you seek me?”“I am a Woodman, and made of tin. Therefore I have no heart, and cannotlove. I pray you to give me a heart that I may be as other men are.”“Why should I do this?” demanded the Beast.“Because I ask it, and you alone can grant my request,” answered theWoodman.Oz gave a low growl at this, but said, gruffly: “If you indeed desire aheart, you must earn it.”“How?” asked the Woodman.“Help Dorothy to kill the Wicked Witch of the West,” replied the Beast.“When the Witch is dead, come to me, and I will then give you thebiggest and kindest and most loving heart in all the Land of Oz.”So the Tin Woodman was forced to return sorrowfully to his friends andtell them of the terrible Beast he had seen. They all wondered greatlyat the many forms the Great Wizard could take upon himself, and theLion said:“If he is a Beast when I go to see him, I shall roar my loudest, and sofrighten him that he will grant all I ask. And if he is the lovelyLady, I shall pretend to spring upon her, and so compel her to do mybidding. And if he is the great Head, he will be at my mercy; for Iwill roll this head all about the room until he promises to give uswhat we desire. So be of good cheer, my friends, for all will yet bewell.”The next morning the soldier with the green whiskers led the Lion tothe great Throne Room and bade him enter the presence of Oz.The Lion at once passed through the door, and glancing around saw, tohis surprise, that before the throne was a Ball of Fire, so fierce andglowing he could scarcely bear to gaze upon it. His first thought wasthat Oz had by accident caught on fire and was burning up; but when hetried to go nearer, the heat was so intense that it singed hiswhiskers, and he crept back tremblingly to a spot nearer the door.Then a low, quiet voice came from the Ball of Fire, and these were thewords it spoke:“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Who are you, and why do you seek me?”And the Lion answered, “I am a Cowardly Lion, afraid of everything. Icame to you to beg that you give me courage, so that in reality I maybecome the King of Beasts, as men call me.”“Why should I give you courage?” demanded Oz.“Because of all Wizards you are the greatest, and alone have power togrant my request,” answered the Lion.The Ball of Fire burned fiercely for a time, and the voice said, “Bringme proof that the Wicked Witch is dead, and that moment I will give youcourage. But as long as the Witch lives, you must remain a coward.”The Lion was angry at this speech, but could say nothing in reply, andwhile he stood silently gazing at the Ball of Fire it became sofuriously hot that he turned tail and rushed from the room. He was gladto find his friends waiting for him, and told them of his terribleinterview with the Wizard.“What shall we do now?” asked Dorothy sadly.“There is only one thing we can do,” returned the Lion, “and that is togo to the land of the Winkies, seek out the Wicked Witch, and destroyher.”“But suppose we cannot?” said the girl.“Then I shall never have courage,” declared the Lion.“And I shall never have brains,” added the Scarecrow.“And I shall never have a heart,” spoke the Tin Woodman.“And I shall never see Aunt Em and Uncle Henry,” said Dorothy,beginning to cry.“Be careful!” cried the green girl. “The tears will fall on your greensilk gown and spot it.”So Dorothy dried her eyes and said, “I suppose we must try it; but I amsure I do not want to kill anybody, even to see Aunt Em again.”“I will go with you; but I’m too much of a coward to kill the Witch,”said the Lion.“I will go too,” declared the Scarecrow; “but I shall not be of muchhelp to you, I am such a fool.”“I haven’t the heart to harm even a Witch,” remarked the Tin Woodman;“but if you go I certainly shall go with you.”Therefore it was decided to start upon their journey the next morning,and the Woodman sharpened his axe on a green grindstone and had all hisjoints properly oiled. The Scarecrow stuffed himself with fresh strawand Dorothy put new paint on his eyes that he might see better. Thegreen girl, who was very kind to them, filled Dorothy’s basket withgood things to eat, and fastened a little bell around Toto’s neck witha green ribbon.They went to bed quite early and slept soundly until daylight, whenthey were awakened by the crowing of a green cock that lived in theback yard of the Palace, and the cackling of a hen that had laid agreen egg.Chapter XIIThe Search for the Wicked WitchThe soldier with the green whiskers led them through the streets of theEmerald City until they reached the room where the Guardian of theGates lived. This officer unlocked their spectacles to put them back inhis great box, and then he politely opened the gate for our friends.“Which road leads to the Wicked Witch of the West?” asked Dorothy.“There is no road,” answered the Guardian of the Gates. “No one everwishes to go that way.”“How, then, are we to find her?” inquired the girl.“That will be easy,” replied the man, “for when she knows you are inthe country of the Winkies she will find you, and make you all herslaves.”“Perhaps not,” said the Scarecrow, “for we mean to destroy her.”“Oh, that is different,” said the Guardian of the Gates. “No one hasever destroyed her before, so I naturally thought she would make slavesof you, as she has of the rest. But take care; for she is wicked andfierce, and may not allow you to destroy her. Keep to the West, wherethe sun sets, and you cannot fail to find her.”They thanked him and bade him good-bye, and turned toward the West,walking over fields of soft grass dotted here and there with daisiesand buttercups. Dorothy still wore the pretty silk dress she had put onin the palace, but now, to her surprise, she found it was no longergreen, but pure white. The ribbon around Toto’s neck had also lost itsgreen color and was as white as Dorothy’s dress.The Emerald City was soon left far behind. As they advanced the groundbecame rougher and hillier, for there were no farms nor houses in thiscountry of the West, and the ground was untilled.In the afternoon the sun shone hot in their faces, for there were notrees to offer them shade; so that before night Dorothy and Toto andthe Lion were tired, and lay down upon the grass and fell asleep, withthe Woodman and the Scarecrow keeping watch.Now the Wicked Witch of the West had but one eye, yet that was aspowerful as a telescope, and could see everywhere. So, as she sat inthe door of her castle, she happened to look around and saw Dorothylying asleep, with her friends all about her. They were a long distanceoff, but the Wicked Witch was angry to find them in her country; so sheblew upon a silver whistle that hung around her neck.At once there came running to her from all directions a pack of greatwolves. They had long legs and fierce eyes and sharp teeth.“Go to those people,” said the Witch, “and tear them to pieces.”“Are you not going to make them your slaves?” asked the leader of thewolves.“No,” she answered, “one is of tin, and one of straw; one is a girl andanother a Lion. None of them is fit to work, so you may tear them intosmall pieces.”“Very well,” said the wolf, and he dashed away at full speed, followedby the others.It was lucky the Scarecrow and the Woodman were wide awake and heardthe wolves coming.“This is my fight,” said the Woodman, “so get behind me and I will meetthem as they come.”He seized his axe, which he had made very sharp, and as the leader ofthe wolves came on the Tin Woodman swung his arm and chopped the wolf’shead from its body, so that it immediately died. As soon as he couldraise his axe another wolf came up, and he also fell under the sharpedge of the Tin Woodman’s weapon. There were forty wolves, and fortytimes a wolf was killed, so that at last they all lay dead in a heapbefore the Woodman.Then he put down his axe and sat beside the Scarecrow, who said, “Itwas a good fight, friend.”They waited until Dorothy awoke the next morning. The little girl wasquite frightened when she saw the great pile of shaggy wolves, but theTin Woodman told her all. She thanked him for saving them and sat downto breakfast, after which they started again upon their journey.Now this same morning the Wicked Witch came to the door of her castleand looked out with her one eye that could see far off. She saw all herwolves lying dead, and the strangers still traveling through hercountry. This made her angrier than before, and she blew her silverwhistle twice.Straightway a great flock of wild crows came flying toward her, enoughto darken the sky.And the Wicked Witch said to the King Crow, “Fly at once to thestrangers; peck out their eyes and tear them to pieces.”The wild crows flew in one great flock toward Dorothy and hercompanions. When the little girl saw them coming she was afraid.But the Scarecrow said, “This is my battle, so lie down beside me andyou will not be harmed.”So they all lay upon the ground except the Scarecrow, and he stood upand stretched out his arms. And when the crows saw him they werefrightened, as these birds always are by scarecrows, and did not dareto come any nearer. But the King Crow said:“It is only a stuffed man. I will peck his eyes out.”The King Crow flew at the Scarecrow, who caught it by the head andtwisted its neck until it died. And then another crow flew at him, andthe Scarecrow twisted its neck also. There were forty crows, and fortytimes the Scarecrow twisted a neck, until at last all were lying deadbeside him. Then he called to his companions to rise, and again theywent upon their journey.When the Wicked Witch looked out again and saw all her crows lying in aheap, she got into a terrible rage, and blew three times upon hersilver whistle.Forthwith there was heard a great buzzing in the air, and a swarm ofblack bees came flying toward her.“Go to the strangers and sting them to death!” commanded the Witch, andthe bees turned and flew rapidly until they came to where Dorothy andher friends were walking. But the Woodman had seen them coming, and theScarecrow had decided what to do.“Take out my straw and scatter it over the little girl and the dog andthe Lion,” he said to the Woodman, “and the bees cannot sting them.”This the Woodman did, and as Dorothy lay close beside the Lion and heldToto in her arms, the straw covered them entirely.The bees came and found no one but the Woodman to sting, so they flewat him and broke off all their stings against the tin, without hurtingthe Woodman at all. And as bees cannot live when their stings arebroken that was the end of the black bees, and they lay scattered thickabout the Woodman, like little heaps of fine coal.Then Dorothy and the Lion got up, and the girl helped the Tin Woodmanput the straw back into the Scarecrow again, until he was as good asever. So they started upon their journey once more.The Wicked Witch was so angry when she saw her black bees in littleheaps like fine coal that she stamped her foot and tore her hair andgnashed her teeth. And then she called a dozen of her slaves, who werethe Winkies, and gave them sharp spears, telling them to go to thestrangers and destroy them.The Winkies were not a brave people, but they had to do as they weretold. So they marched away until they came near to Dorothy. Then theLion gave a great roar and sprang towards them, and the poor Winkieswere so frightened that they ran back as fast as they could.When they returned to the castle the Wicked Witch beat them well with astrap, and sent them back to their work, after which she sat down tothink what she should do next. She could not understand how all herplans to destroy these strangers had failed; but she was a powerfulWitch, as well as a wicked one, and she soon made up her mind how toact.There was, in her cupboard, a Golden Cap, with a circle of diamonds andrubies running round it. This Golden Cap had a charm. Whoever owned itcould call three times upon the Winged Monkeys, who would obey anyorder they were given. But no person could command these strangecreatures more than three times. Twice already the Wicked Witch hadused the charm of the Cap. Once was when she had made the Winkies herslaves, and set herself to rule over their country. The Winged Monkeyshad helped her do this. The second time was when she had fought againstthe Great Oz himself, and driven him out of the land of the West. TheWinged Monkeys had also helped her in doing this. Only once more couldshe use this Golden Cap, for which reason she did not like to do sountil all her other powers were exhausted. But now that her fiercewolves and her wild crows and her stinging bees were gone, and herslaves had been scared away by the Cowardly Lion, she saw there wasonly one way left to destroy Dorothy and her friends.So the Wicked Witch took the Golden Cap from her cupboard and placed itupon her head. Then she stood upon her left foot and said slowly:“Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!”Next she stood upon her right foot and said:“Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!”After this she stood upon both feet and cried in a loud voice:“Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!”Now the charm began to work. The sky was darkened, and a low rumblingsound was heard in the air. There was a rushing of many wings, a greatchattering and laughing, and the sun came out of the dark sky to showthe Wicked Witch surrounded by a crowd of monkeys, each with a pair ofimmense and powerful wings on his shoulders.One, much bigger than the others, seemed to be their leader. He flewclose to the Witch and said, “You have called us for the third and lasttime. What do you command?”“Go to the strangers who are within my land and destroy them all exceptthe Lion,” said the Wicked Witch. “Bring that beast to me, for I have amind to harness him like a horse, and make him work.”“Your commands shall be obeyed,” said the leader. Then, with a greatdeal of chattering and noise, the Winged Monkeys flew away to the placewhere Dorothy and her friends were walking.Some of the Monkeys seized the Tin Woodman and carried him through theair until they were over a country thickly covered with sharp rocks.Here they dropped the poor Woodman, who fell a great distance to therocks, where he lay so battered and dented that he could neither movenor groan.Others of the Monkeys caught the Scarecrow, and with their long fingerspulled all of the straw out of his clothes and head. They made his hatand boots and clothes into a small bundle and threw it into the topbranches of a tall tree.The remaining Monkeys threw pieces of stout rope around the Lion andwound many coils about his body and head and legs, until he was unableto bite or scratch or struggle in any way. Then they lifted him up andflew away with him to the Witch’s castle, where he was placed in asmall yard with a high iron fence around it, so that he could notescape.But Dorothy they did not harm at all. She stood, with Toto in her arms,watching the sad fate of her comrades and thinking it would soon be herturn. The leader of the Winged Monkeys flew up to her, his long, hairyarms stretched out and his ugly face grinning terribly; but he saw themark of the Good Witch’s kiss upon her forehead and stopped short,motioning the others not to touch her.“We dare not harm this little girl,” he said to them, “for she isprotected by the Power of Good, and that is greater than the Power ofEvil. All we can do is to carry her to the castle of the Wicked Witchand leave her there.”So, carefully and gently, they lifted Dorothy in their arms and carriedher swiftly through the air until they came to the castle, where theyset her down upon the front doorstep. Then the leader said to theWitch:“We have obeyed you as far as we were able. The Tin Woodman and theScarecrow are destroyed, and the Lion is tied up in your yard. Thelittle girl we dare not harm, nor the dog she carries in her arms. Yourpower over our band is now ended, and you will never see us again.”Then all the Winged Monkeys, with much laughing and chattering andnoise, flew into the air and were soon out of sight.The Wicked Witch was both surprised and worried when she saw the markon Dorothy’s forehead, for she knew well that neither the WingedMonkeys nor she, herself, dare hurt the girl in any way. She lookeddown at Dorothy’s feet, and seeing the Silver Shoes, began to tremblewith fear, for she knew what a powerful charm belonged to them. Atfirst the Witch was tempted to run away from Dorothy; but she happenedto look into the child’s eyes and saw how simple the soul behind themwas, and that the little girl did not know of the wonderful power theSilver Shoes gave her. So the Wicked Witch laughed to herself, andthought, “I can still make her my slave, for she does not know how touse her power.” Then she said to Dorothy, harshly and severely:“Come with me; and see that you mind everything I tell you, for if youdo not I will make an end of you, as I did of the Tin Woodman and theScarecrow.”Dorothy followed her through many of the beautiful rooms in her castleuntil they came to the kitchen, where the Witch bade her clean the potsand kettles and sweep the floor and keep the fire fed with wood.Dorothy went to work meekly, with her mind made up to work as hard asshe could; for she was glad the Wicked Witch had decided not to killher.With Dorothy hard at work, the Witch thought she would go into thecourtyard and harness the Cowardly Lion like a horse; it would amuseher, she was sure, to make him draw her chariot whenever she wished togo to drive. But as she opened the gate the Lion gave a loud roar andbounded at her so fiercely that the Witch was afraid, and ran out andshut the gate again.“If I cannot harness you,” said the Witch to the Lion, speaking throughthe bars of the gate, “I can starve you. You shall have nothing to eatuntil you do as I wish.”So after that she took no food to the imprisoned Lion; but every dayshe came to the gate at noon and asked, “Are you ready to be harnessedlike a horse?”And the Lion would answer, “No. If you come in this yard, I will biteyou.”The reason the Lion did not have to do as the Witch wished was thatevery night, while the woman was asleep, Dorothy carried him food fromthe cupboard. After he had eaten he would lie down on his bed of straw,and Dorothy would lie beside him and put her head on his soft, shaggymane, while they talked of their troubles and tried to plan some way toescape. But they could find no way to get out of the castle, for it wasconstantly guarded by the yellow Winkies, who were the slaves of theWicked Witch and too afraid of her not to do as she told them.The girl had to work hard during the day, and often the Witchthreatened to beat her with the same old umbrella she always carried inher hand. But, in truth, she did not dare to strike Dorothy, because ofthe mark upon her forehead. The child did not know this, and was fullof fear for herself and Toto. Once the Witch struck Toto a blow withher umbrella and the brave little dog flew at her and bit her leg inreturn. The Witch did not bleed where she was bitten, for she was sowicked that the blood in her had dried up many years before.Dorothy’s life became very sad as she grew to understand that it wouldbe harder than ever to get back to Kansas and Aunt Em again. Sometimesshe would cry bitterly for hours, with Toto sitting at her feet andlooking into her face, whining dismally to show how sorry he was forhis little mistress. Toto did not really care whether he was in Kansasor the Land of Oz so long as Dorothy was with him; but he knew thelittle girl was unhappy, and that made him unhappy too.Now the Wicked Witch had a great longing to have for her own the SilverShoes which the girl always wore. Her bees and her crows and her wolveswere lying in heaps and drying up, and she had used up all the power ofthe Golden Cap; but if she could only get hold of the Silver Shoes,they would give her more power than all the other things she had lost.She watched Dorothy carefully, to see if she ever took off her shoes,thinking she might steal them. But the child was so proud of her prettyshoes that she never took them off except at night and when she tookher bath. The Witch was too much afraid of the dark to dare go inDorothy’s room at night to take the shoes, and her dread of water wasgreater than her fear of the dark, so she never came near when Dorothywas bathing. Indeed, the old Witch never touched water, nor ever letwater touch her in any way.But the wicked creature was very cunning, and she finally thought of atrick that would give her what she wanted. She placed a bar of iron inthe middle of the kitchen floor, and then by her magic arts made theiron invisible to human eyes. So that when Dorothy walked across thefloor she stumbled over the bar, not being able to see it, and fell atfull length. She was not much hurt, but in her fall one of the SilverShoes came off; and before she could reach it, the Witch had snatchedit away and put it on her own skinny foot.The wicked woman was greatly pleased with the success of her trick, foras long as she had one of the shoes she owned half the power of theircharm, and Dorothy could not use it against her, even had she known howto do so.The little girl, seeing she had lost one of her pretty shoes, grewangry, and said to the Witch, “Give me back my shoe!”“I will not,” retorted the Witch, “for it is now my shoe, and notyours.”“You are a wicked creature!” cried Dorothy. “You have no right to takemy shoe from me.”“I shall keep it, just the same,” said the Witch, laughing at her, “andsomeday I shall get the other one from you, too.”This made Dorothy so very angry that she picked up the bucket of waterthat stood near and dashed it over the Witch, wetting her from head tofoot.Instantly the wicked woman gave a loud cry of fear, and then, asDorothy looked at her in wonder, the Witch began to shrink and fallaway.“See what you have done!” she screamed. “In a minute I shall meltaway.”“I’m very sorry, indeed,” said Dorothy, who was truly frightened to seethe Witch actually melting away like brown sugar before her very eyes.“Didn’t you know water would be the end of me?” asked the Witch, in awailing, despairing voice.“Of course not,” answered Dorothy. “How should I?”“Well, in a few minutes I shall be all melted, and you will have thecastle to yourself. I have been wicked in my day, but I never thought alittle girl like you would ever be able to melt me and end my wickeddeeds. Look out—here I go!”With these words the Witch fell down in a brown, melted, shapeless massand began to spread over the clean boards of the kitchen floor. Seeingthat she had really melted away to nothing, Dorothy drew another bucketof water and threw it over the mess. She then swept it all out thedoor. After picking out the silver shoe, which was all that was left ofthe old woman, she cleaned and dried it with a cloth, and put it on herfoot again. Then, being at last free to do as she chose, she ran out tothe courtyard to tell the Lion that the Wicked Witch of the West hadcome to an end, and that they were no longer prisoners in a strangeland.Chapter XIIIThe RescueThe Cowardly Lion was much pleased to hear that the Wicked Witch hadbeen melted by a bucket of water, and Dorothy at once unlocked the gateof his prison and set him free. They went in together to the castle,where Dorothy’s first act was to call all the Winkies together and tellthem that they were no longer slaves.There was great rejoicing among the yellow Winkies, for they had beenmade to work hard during many years for the Wicked Witch, who hadalways treated them with great cruelty. They kept this day as aholiday, then and ever after, and spent the time in feasting anddancing.“If our friends, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, were only with us,”said the Lion, “I should be quite happy.”“Don’t you suppose we could rescue them?” asked the girl anxiously.“We can try,” answered the Lion.So they called the yellow Winkies and asked them if they would help torescue their friends, and the Winkies said that they would be delightedto do all in their power for Dorothy, who had set them free frombondage. So she chose a number of the Winkies who looked as if theyknew the most, and they all started away. They traveled that day andpart of the next until they came to the rocky plain where the TinWoodman lay, all battered and bent. His axe was near him, but the bladewas rusted and the handle broken off short.The Winkies lifted him tenderly in their arms, and carried him back tothe Yellow Castle again, Dorothy shedding a few tears by the way at thesad plight of her old friend, and the Lion looking sober and sorry.When they reached the castle Dorothy said to the Winkies:“Are any of your people tinsmiths?”“Oh, yes. Some of us are very good tinsmiths,” they told her.“Then bring them to me,” she said. And when the tinsmiths came,bringing with them all their tools in baskets, she inquired, “Can youstraighten out those dents in the Tin Woodman, and bend him back intoshape again, and solder him together where he is broken?”The tinsmiths looked the Woodman over carefully and then answered thatthey thought they could mend him so he would be as good as ever. Sothey set to work in one of the big yellow rooms of the castle andworked for three days and four nights, hammering and twisting andbending and soldering and polishing and pounding at the legs and bodyand head of the Tin Woodman, until at last he was straightened out intohis old form, and his joints worked as well as ever. To be sure, therewere several patches on him, but the tinsmiths did a good job, and asthe Woodman was not a vain man he did not mind the patches at all.When, at last, he walked into Dorothy’s room and thanked her forrescuing him, he was so pleased that he wept tears of joy, and Dorothyhad to wipe every tear carefully from his face with her apron, so hisjoints would not be rusted. At the same time her own tears fell thickand fast at the joy of meeting her old friend again, and these tearsdid not need to be wiped away. As for the Lion, he wiped his eyes sooften with the tip of his tail that it became quite wet, and he wasobliged to go out into the courtyard and hold it in the sun till itdried.“If we only had the Scarecrow with us again,” said the Tin Woodman,when Dorothy had finished telling him everything that had happened, “Ishould be quite happy.”“We must try to find him,” said the girl.So she called the Winkies to help her, and they walked all that day andpart of the next until they came to the tall tree in the branches ofwhich the Winged Monkeys had tossed the Scarecrow’s clothes.It was a very tall tree, and the trunk was so smooth that no one couldclimb it; but the Woodman said at once, “I’ll chop it down, and then wecan get the Scarecrow’s clothes.”Now while the tinsmiths had been at work mending the Woodman himself,another of the Winkies, who was a goldsmith, had made an axe-handle ofsolid gold and fitted it to the Woodman’s axe, instead of the oldbroken handle. Others polished the blade until all the rust was removedand it glistened like burnished silver.As soon as he had spoken, the Tin Woodman began to chop, and in a shorttime the tree fell over with a crash, whereupon the Scarecrow’s clothesfell out of the branches and rolled off on the ground.Dorothy picked them up and had the Winkies carry them back to thecastle, where they were stuffed with nice, clean straw; and behold!here was the Scarecrow, as good as ever, thanking them over and overagain for saving him.Now that they were reunited, Dorothy and her friends spent a few happydays at the Yellow Castle, where they found everything they needed tomake them comfortable.But one day the girl thought of Aunt Em, and said, “We must go back toOz, and claim his promise.”“Yes,” said the Woodman, “at last I shall get my heart.”“And I shall get my brains,” added the Scarecrow joyfully.“And I shall get my courage,” said the Lion thoughtfully.“And I shall get back to Kansas,” cried Dorothy, clapping her hands.“Oh, let us start for the Emerald City tomorrow!”This they decided to do. The next day they called the Winkies togetherand bade them good-bye. The Winkies were sorry to have them go, andthey had grown so fond of the Tin Woodman that they begged him to stayand rule over them and the Yellow Land of the West. Finding they weredetermined to go, the Winkies gave Toto and the Lion each a goldencollar; and to Dorothy they presented a beautiful bracelet studded withdiamonds; and to the Scarecrow they gave a gold-headed walking stick,to keep him from stumbling; and to the Tin Woodman they offered asilver oil-can, inlaid with gold and set with precious jewels.Every one of the travelers made the Winkies a pretty speech in return,and all shook hands with them until their arms ached.Dorothy went to the Witch’s cupboard to fill her basket with food forthe journey, and there she saw the Golden Cap. She tried it on her ownhead and found that it fitted her exactly. She did not know anythingabout the charm of the Golden Cap, but she saw that it was pretty, soshe made up her mind to wear it and carry her sunbonnet in the basket.Then, being prepared for the journey, they all started for the EmeraldCity; and the Winkies gave them three cheers and many good wishes tocarry with them.Chapter XIVThe Winged MonkeysYou will remember there was no road—not even a pathway—between thecastle of the Wicked Witch and the Emerald City. When the fourtravelers went in search of the Witch she had seen them coming, and sosent the Winged Monkeys to bring them to her. It was much harder tofind their way back through the big fields of buttercups and yellowdaisies than it was being carried. They knew, of course, they must gostraight east, toward the rising sun; and they started off in the rightway. But at noon, when the sun was over their heads, they did not knowwhich was east and which was west, and that was the reason they werelost in the great fields. They kept on walking, however, and at nightthe moon came out and shone brightly. So they lay down among the sweetsmelling yellow flowers and slept soundly until morning—all but theScarecrow and the Tin Woodman.The next morning the sun was behind a cloud, but they started on, as ifthey were quite sure which way they were going.“If we walk far enough,” said Dorothy, “I am sure we shall sometimecome to some place.”But day by day passed away, and they still saw nothing before them butthe scarlet fields. The Scarecrow began to grumble a bit.“We have surely lost our way,” he said, “and unless we find it again intime to reach the Emerald City, I shall never get my brains.”“Nor I my heart,” declared the Tin Woodman. “It seems to me I canscarcely wait till I get to Oz, and you must admit this is a very longjourney.”“You see,” said the Cowardly Lion, with a whimper, “I haven’t thecourage to keep tramping forever, without getting anywhere at all.”Then Dorothy lost heart. She sat down on the grass and looked at hercompanions, and they sat down and looked at her, and Toto found thatfor the first time in his life he was too tired to chase a butterflythat flew past his head. So he put out his tongue and panted and lookedat Dorothy as if to ask what they should do next.“Suppose we call the field mice,” she suggested. “They could probablytell us the way to the Emerald City.”“To be sure they could,” cried the Scarecrow. “Why didn’t we think ofthat before?”Dorothy blew the little whistle she had always carried about her necksince the Queen of the Mice had given it to her. In a few minutes theyheard the pattering of tiny feet, and many of the small gray mice camerunning up to her. Among them was the Queen herself, who asked, in hersqueaky little voice:“What can I do for my friends?”“We have lost our way,” said Dorothy. “Can you tell us where theEmerald City is?”“Certainly,” answered the Queen; “but it is a great way off, for youhave had it at your backs all this time.” Then she noticed Dorothy’sGolden Cap, and said, “Why don’t you use the charm of the Cap, and callthe Winged Monkeys to you? They will carry you to the City of Oz inless than an hour.”“I didn’t know there was a charm,” answered Dorothy, in surprise. “Whatis it?”“It is written inside the Golden Cap,” replied the Queen of the Mice.“But if you are going to call the Winged Monkeys we must run away, forthey are full of mischief and think it great fun to plague us.”“Won’t they hurt me?” asked the girl anxiously.“Oh, no. They must obey the wearer of the Cap. Good-bye!” And shescampered out of sight, with all the mice hurrying after her.Dorothy looked inside the Golden Cap and saw some words written uponthe lining. These, she thought, must be the charm, so she read thedirections carefully and put the Cap upon her head.“Ep-pe, pep-pe, kak-ke!” she said, standing on her left foot.“What did you say?” asked the Scarecrow, who did not know what she wasdoing.“Hil-lo, hol-lo, hel-lo!” Dorothy went on, standing this time on herright foot.“Hello!” replied the Tin Woodman calmly.“Ziz-zy, zuz-zy, zik!” said Dorothy, who was now standing on both feet.This ended the saying of the charm, and they heard a great chatteringand flapping of wings, as the band of Winged Monkeys flew up to them.The King bowed low before Dorothy, and asked, “What is your command?”“We wish to go to the Emerald City,” said the child, “and we have lostour way.”“We will carry you,” replied the King, and no sooner had he spoken thantwo of the Monkeys caught Dorothy in their arms and flew away with her.Others took the Scarecrow and the Woodman and the Lion, and one littleMonkey seized Toto and flew after them, although the dog tried hard tobite him.The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were rather frightened at first, forthey remembered how badly the Winged Monkeys had treated them before;but they saw that no harm was intended, so they rode through the airquite cheerfully, and had a fine time looking at the pretty gardens andwoods far below them.Dorothy found herself riding easily between two of the biggest Monkeys,one of them the King himself. They had made a chair of their hands andwere careful not to hurt her.“Why do you have to obey the charm of the Golden Cap?” she asked.“That is a long story,” answered the King, with a winged laugh; “but aswe have a long journey before us, I will pass the time by telling youabout it, if you wish.”“I shall be glad to hear it,” she replied.“Once,” began the leader, “we were a free people, living happily in thegreat forest, flying from tree to tree, eating nuts and fruit, anddoing just as we pleased without calling anybody master. Perhaps someof us were rather too full of mischief at times, flying down to pullthe tails of the animals that had no wings, chasing birds, and throwingnuts at the people who walked in the forest. But we were careless andhappy and full of fun, and enjoyed every minute of the day. This wasmany years ago, long before Oz came out of the clouds to rule over thisland.“There lived here then, away at the North, a beautiful princess, whowas also a powerful sorceress. All her magic was used to help thepeople, and she was never known to hurt anyone who was good. Her namewas Gayelette, and she lived in a handsome palace built from greatblocks of ruby. Everyone loved her, but her greatest sorrow was thatshe could find no one to love in return, since all the men were muchtoo stupid and ugly to mate with one so beautiful and wise. At last,however, she found a boy who was handsome and manly and wise beyond hisyears. Gayelette made up her mind that when he grew to be a man shewould make him her husband, so she took him to her ruby palace and usedall her magic powers to make him as strong and good and lovely as anywoman could wish. When he grew to manhood, Quelala, as he was called,was said to be the best and wisest man in all the land, while his manlybeauty was so great that Gayelette loved him dearly, and hastened tomake everything ready for the wedding.“My grandfather was at that time the King of the Winged Monkeys whichlived in the forest near Gayelette’s palace, and the old fellow loved ajoke better than a good dinner. One day, just before the wedding, mygrandfather was flying out with his band when he saw Quelala walkingbeside the river. He was dressed in a rich costume of pink silk andpurple velvet, and my grandfather thought he would see what he coulddo. At his word the band flew down and seized Quelala, carried him intheir arms until they were over the middle of the river, and thendropped him into the water.“‘Swim out, my fine fellow,’ cried my grandfather, ‘and see if thewater has spotted your clothes.’ Quelala was much too wise not to swim,and he was not in the least spoiled by all his good fortune. Helaughed, when he came to the top of the water, and swam in to shore.But when Gayelette came running out to him she found his silks andvelvet all ruined by the river.“The princess was angry, and she knew, of course, who did it. She hadall the Winged Monkeys brought before her, and she said at first thattheir wings should be tied and they should be treated as they hadtreated Quelala, and dropped in the river. But my grandfather pleadedhard, for he knew the Monkeys would drown in the river with their wingstied, and Quelala said a kind word for them also; so that Gayelettefinally spared them, on condition that the Winged Monkeys should everafter do three times the bidding of the owner of the Golden Cap. ThisCap had been made for a wedding present to Quelala, and it is said tohave cost the princess half her kingdom. Of course my grandfather andall the other Monkeys at once agreed to the condition, and that is howit happens that we are three times the slaves of the owner of theGolden Cap, whosoever he may be.”“And what became of them?” asked Dorothy, who had been greatlyinterested in the story.“Quelala being the first owner of the Golden Cap,” replied the Monkey,“he was the first to lay his wishes upon us. As his bride could notbear the sight of us, he called us all to him in the forest after hehad married her and ordered us always to keep where she could neveragain set eyes on a Winged Monkey, which we were glad to do, for wewere all afraid of her.“This was all we ever had to do until the Golden Cap fell into thehands of the Wicked Witch of the West, who made us enslave the Winkies,and afterward drive Oz himself out of the Land of the West. Now theGolden Cap is yours, and three times you have the right to lay yourwishes upon us.”As the Monkey King finished his story Dorothy looked down and saw thegreen, shining walls of the Emerald City before them. She wondered atthe rapid flight of the Monkeys, but was glad the journey was over. Thestrange creatures set the travelers down carefully before the gate ofthe City, the King bowed low to Dorothy, and then flew swiftly away,followed by all his band.“That was a good ride,” said the little girl.“Yes, and a quick way out of our troubles,” replied the Lion. “Howlucky it was you brought away that wonderful Cap!”Chapter XVThe Discovery of Oz, the TerribleThe four travelers walked up to the great gate of Emerald City and rangthe bell. After ringing several times, it was opened by the sameGuardian of the Gates they had met before.“What! are you back again?” he asked, in surprise.“Do you not see us?” answered the Scarecrow.“But I thought you had gone to visit the Wicked Witch of the West.”“We did visit her,” said the Scarecrow.“And she let you go again?” asked the man, in wonder.“She could not help it, for she is melted,” explained the Scarecrow.“Melted! Well, that is good news, indeed,” said the man. “Who meltedher?”“It was Dorothy,” said the Lion gravely.“Good gracious!” exclaimed the man, and he bowed very low indeed beforeher.Then he led them into his little room and locked the spectacles fromthe great box on all their eyes, just as he had done before. Afterwardthey passed on through the gate into the Emerald City. When the peopleheard from the Guardian of the Gates that Dorothy had melted the WickedWitch of the West, they all gathered around the travelers and followedthem in a great crowd to the Palace of Oz.The soldier with the green whiskers was still on guard before the door,but he let them in at once, and they were again met by the beautifulgreen girl, who showed each of them to their old rooms at once, so theymight rest until the Great Oz was ready to receive them.The soldier had the news carried straight to Oz that Dorothy and theother travelers had come back again, after destroying the Wicked Witch;but Oz made no reply. They thought the Great Wizard would send for themat once, but he did not. They had no word from him the next day, northe next, nor the next. The waiting was tiresome and wearing, and atlast they grew vexed that Oz should treat them in so poor a fashion,after sending them to undergo hardships and slavery. So the Scarecrowat last asked the green girl to take another message to Oz, saying ifhe did not let them in to see him at once they would call the WingedMonkeys to help them, and find out whether he kept his promises or not.When the Wizard was given this message he was so frightened that hesent word for them to come to the Throne Room at four minutes afternine o’clock the next morning. He had once met the Winged Monkeys inthe Land of the West, and he did not wish to meet them again.The four travelers passed a sleepless night, each thinking of the giftOz had promised to bestow on him. Dorothy fell asleep only once, andthen she dreamed she was in Kansas, where Aunt Em was telling her howglad she was to have her little girl at home again.Promptly at nine o’clock the next morning the green-whiskered soldiercame to them, and four minutes later they all went into the Throne Roomof the Great Oz.Of course each one of them expected to see the Wizard in the shape hehad taken before, and all were greatly surprised when they looked aboutand saw no one at all in the room. They kept close to the door andcloser to one another, for the stillness of the empty room was moredreadful than any of the forms they had seen Oz take.Presently they heard a solemn Voice, that seemed to come from somewherenear the top of the great dome, and it said:“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible. Why do you seek me?”They looked again in every part of the room, and then, seeing no one,Dorothy asked, “Where are you?”“I am everywhere,” answered the Voice, “but to the eyes of commonmortals I am invisible. I will now seat myself upon my throne, that youmay converse with me.” Indeed, the Voice seemed just then to comestraight from the throne itself; so they walked toward it and stood ina row while Dorothy said:“We have come to claim our promise, O Oz.”“What promise?” asked Oz.“You promised to send me back to Kansas when the Wicked Witch wasdestroyed,” said the girl.“And you promised to give me brains,” said the Scarecrow.“And you promised to give me a heart,” said the Tin Woodman.“And you promised to give me courage,” said the Cowardly Lion.“Is the Wicked Witch really destroyed?” asked the Voice, and Dorothythought it trembled a little.“Yes,” she answered, “I melted her with a bucket of water.”“Dear me,” said the Voice, “how sudden! Well, come to me tomorrow, forI must have time to think it over.”“You’ve had plenty of time already,” said the Tin Woodman angrily.“We shan’t wait a day longer,” said the Scarecrow.“You must keep your promises to us!” exclaimed Dorothy.The Lion thought it might be as well to frighten the Wizard, so he gavea large, loud roar, which was so fierce and dreadful that Toto jumpedaway from him in alarm and tipped over the screen that stood in acorner. As it fell with a crash they looked that way, and the nextmoment all of them were filled with wonder. For they saw, standing injust the spot the screen had hidden, a little old man, with a bald headand a wrinkled face, who seemed to be as much surprised as they were.The Tin Woodman, raising his axe, rushed toward the little man andcried out, “Who are you?”“I am Oz, the Great and Terrible,” said the little man, in a tremblingvoice. “But don’t strike me—please don’t—and I’ll do anything you wantme to.”Our friends looked at him in surprise and dismay.“I thought Oz was a great Head,” said Dorothy.“And I thought Oz was a lovely Lady,” said the Scarecrow.“And I thought Oz was a terrible Beast,” said the Tin Woodman.“And I thought Oz was a Ball of Fire,” exclaimed the Lion.“No, you are all wrong,” said the little man meekly. “I have beenmaking believe.”“Making believe!” cried Dorothy. “Are you not a Great Wizard?”“Hush, my dear,” he said. “Don’t speak so loud, or you will beoverheard—and I should be ruined. I’m supposed to be a Great Wizard.”“And aren’t you?” she asked.“Not a bit of it, my dear; I’m just a common man.”“You’re more than that,” said the Scarecrow, in a grieved tone; “you’rea humbug.”“Exactly so!” declared the little man, rubbing his hands together as ifit pleased him. “I am a humbug.”“But this is terrible,” said the Tin Woodman. “How shall I ever get myheart?”“Or I my courage?” asked the Lion.“Or I my brains?” wailed the Scarecrow, wiping the tears from his eyeswith his coat sleeve.“My dear friends,” said Oz, “I pray you not to speak of these littlethings. Think of me, and the terrible trouble I’m in at being foundout.”“Doesn’t anyone else know you’re a humbug?” asked Dorothy.“No one knows it but you four—and myself,” replied Oz. “I have fooledeveryone so long that I thought I should never be found out. It was agreat mistake my ever letting you into the Throne Room. Usually I willnot see even my subjects, and so they believe I am something terrible.”“But, I don’t understand,” said Dorothy, in bewilderment. “How was itthat you appeared to me as a great Head?”“That was one of my tricks,” answered Oz. “Step this way, please, and Iwill tell you all about it.”He led the way to a small chamber in the rear of the Throne Room, andthey all followed him. He pointed to one corner, in which lay the greatHead, made out of many thicknesses of paper, and with a carefullypainted face.“This I hung from the ceiling by a wire,” said Oz. “I stood behind thescreen and pulled a thread, to make the eyes move and the mouth open.”“But how about the voice?” she inquired.“Oh, I am a ventriloquist,” said the little man. “I can throw the soundof my voice wherever I wish, so that you thought it was coming out ofthe Head. Here are the other things I used to deceive you.” He showedthe Scarecrow the dress and the mask he had worn when he seemed to bethe lovely Lady. And the Tin Woodman saw that his terrible Beast wasnothing but a lot of skins, sewn together, with slats to keep theirsides out. As for the Ball of Fire, the false Wizard had hung that alsofrom the ceiling. It was really a ball of cotton, but when oil waspoured upon it the ball burned fiercely.“Really,” said the Scarecrow, “you ought to be ashamed of yourself forbeing such a humbug.”“I am—I certainly am,” answered the little man sorrowfully; “but it wasthe only thing I could do. Sit down, please, there are plenty ofchairs; and I will tell you my story.”So they sat down and listened while he told the following tale.“I was born in Omaha—”“Why, that isn’t very far from Kansas!” cried Dorothy.“No, but it’s farther from here,” he said, shaking his head at hersadly. “When I grew up I became a ventriloquist, and at that I was verywell trained by a great master. I can imitate any kind of a bird orbeast.” Here he mewed so like a kitten that Toto pricked up his earsand looked everywhere to see where she was. “After a time,” continuedOz, “I tired of that, and became a balloonist.”“What is that?” asked Dorothy.“A man who goes up in a balloon on circus day, so as to draw a crowd ofpeople together and get them to pay to see the circus,” he explained.“Oh,” she said, “I know.”“Well, one day I went up in a balloon and the ropes got twisted, sothat I couldn’t come down again. It went way up above the clouds, sofar that a current of air struck it and carried it many, many milesaway. For a day and a night I traveled through the air, and on themorning of the second day I awoke and found the balloon floating over astrange and beautiful country.“It came down gradually, and I was not hurt a bit. But I found myselfin the midst of a strange people, who, seeing me come from the clouds,thought I was a great Wizard. Of course I let them think so, becausethey were afraid of me, and promised to do anything I wished them to.“Just to amuse myself, and keep the good people busy, I ordered them tobuild this City, and my Palace; and they did it all willingly and well.Then I thought, as the country was so green and beautiful, I would callit the Emerald City; and to make the name fit better I put greenspectacles on all the people, so that everything they saw was green.”“But isn’t everything here green?” asked Dorothy.“No more than in any other city,” replied Oz; “but when you wear greenspectacles, why of course everything you see looks green to you. TheEmerald City was built a great many years ago, for I was a young manwhen the balloon brought me here, and I am a very old man now. But mypeople have worn green glasses on their eyes so long that most of themthink it really is an Emerald City, and it certainly is a beautifulplace, abounding in jewels and precious metals, and every good thingthat is needed to make one happy. I have been good to the people, andthey like me; but ever since this Palace was built, I have shut myselfup and would not see any of them.“One of my greatest fears was the Witches, for while I had no magicalpowers at all I soon found out that the Witches were really able to dowonderful things. There were four of them in this country, and theyruled the people who live in the North and South and East and West.Fortunately, the Witches of the North and South were good, and I knewthey would do me no harm; but the Witches of the East and West wereterribly wicked, and had they not thought I was more powerful than theythemselves, they would surely have destroyed me. As it was, I lived indeadly fear of them for many years; so you can imagine how pleased Iwas when I heard your house had fallen on the Wicked Witch of the East.When you came to me, I was willing to promise anything if you wouldonly do away with the other Witch; but, now that you have melted her, Iam ashamed to say that I cannot keep my promises.”“I think you are a very bad man,” said Dorothy.“Oh, no, my dear; I’m really a very good man, but I’m a very badWizard, I must admit.”“Can’t you give me brains?” asked the Scarecrow.“You don’t need them. You are learning something every day. A baby hasbrains, but it doesn’t know much. Experience is the only thing thatbrings knowledge, and the longer you are on earth the more experienceyou are sure to get.”“That may all be true,” said the Scarecrow, “but I shall be veryunhappy unless you give me brains.”The false Wizard looked at him carefully.“Well,” he said with a sigh, “I’m not much of a magician, as I said;but if you will come to me tomorrow morning, I will stuff your headwith brains. I cannot tell you how to use them, however; you must findthat out for yourself.”“Oh, thank you—thank you!” cried the Scarecrow. “I’ll find a way to usethem, never fear!”“But how about my courage?” asked the Lion anxiously.“You have plenty of courage, I am sure,” answered Oz. “All you need isconfidence in yourself. There is no living thing that is not afraidwhen it faces danger. The True courage is in facing danger when you areafraid, and that kind of courage you have in plenty.”“Perhaps I have, but I’m scared just the same,” said the Lion. “I shallreally be very unhappy unless you give me the sort of courage thatmakes one forget he is afraid.”“Very well, I will give you that sort of courage tomorrow,” replied Oz.“How about my heart?” asked the Tin Woodman.“Why, as for that,” answered Oz, “I think you are wrong to want aheart. It makes most people unhappy. If you only knew it, you are inluck not to have a heart.”“That must be a matter of opinion,” said the Tin Woodman. “For my part,I will bear all the unhappiness without a murmur, if you will give methe heart.”“Very well,” answered Oz meekly. “Come to me tomorrow and you shallhave a heart. I have played Wizard for so many years that I may as wellcontinue the part a little longer.”“And now,” said Dorothy, “how am I to get back to Kansas?”“We shall have to think about that,” replied the little man. “Give metwo or three days to consider the matter and I’ll try to find a way tocarry you over the desert. In the meantime you shall all be treated asmy guests, and while you live in the Palace my people will wait uponyou and obey your slightest wish. There is only one thing I ask inreturn for my help—such as it is. You must keep my secret and tell noone I am a humbug.”They agreed to say nothing of what they had learned, and went back totheir rooms in high spirits. Even Dorothy had hope that “The Great andTerrible Humbug,” as she called him, would find a way to send her backto Kansas, and if he did she was willing to forgive him everything.Chapter XVIThe Magic Art of the Great HumbugNext morning the Scarecrow said to his friends:“Congratulate me. I am going to Oz to get my brains at last. When Ireturn I shall be as other men are.”“I have always liked you as you were,” said Dorothy simply.“It is kind of you to like a Scarecrow,” he replied. “But surely youwill think more of me when you hear the splendid thoughts my new brainis going to turn out.” Then he said good-bye to them all in a cheerfulvoice and went to the Throne Room, where he rapped upon the door.“Come in,” said Oz.The Scarecrow went in and found the little man sitting down by thewindow, engaged in deep thought.“I have come for my brains,” remarked the Scarecrow, a little uneasily.“Oh, yes; sit down in that chair, please,” replied Oz. “You must excuseme for taking your head off, but I shall have to do it in order to putyour brains in their proper place.”“That’s all right,” said the Scarecrow. “You are quite welcome to takemy head off, as long as it will be a better one when you put it onagain.”So the Wizard unfastened his head and emptied out the straw. Then heentered the back room and took up a measure of bran, which he mixedwith a great many pins and needles. Having shaken them togetherthoroughly, he filled the top of the Scarecrow’s head with the mixtureand stuffed the rest of the space with straw, to hold it in place.When he had fastened the Scarecrow’s head on his body again he said tohim, “Hereafter you will be a great man, for I have given you a lot ofbran-new brains.”The Scarecrow was both pleased and proud at the fulfillment of hisgreatest wish, and having thanked Oz warmly he went back to hisfriends.Dorothy looked at him curiously. His head was quite bulged out at thetop with brains.“How do you feel?” she asked.“I feel wise indeed,” he answered earnestly. “When I get used to mybrains I shall know everything.”“Why are those needles and pins sticking out of your head?” asked theTin Woodman.“That is proof that he is sharp,” remarked the Lion.“Well, I must go to Oz and get my heart,” said the Woodman. So hewalked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.“Come in,” called Oz, and the Woodman entered and said, “I have comefor my heart.”“Very well,” answered the little man. “But I shall have to cut a holein your breast, so I can put your heart in the right place. I hope itwon’t hurt you.”“Oh, no,” answered the Woodman. “I shall not feel it at all.”So Oz brought a pair of tinsmith’s shears and cut a small, square holein the left side of the Tin Woodman’s breast. Then, going to a chest ofdrawers, he took out a pretty heart, made entirely of silk and stuffedwith sawdust.“Isn’t it a beauty?” he asked.“It is, indeed!” replied the Woodman, who was greatly pleased. “But isit a kind heart?”“Oh, very!” answered Oz. He put the heart in the Woodman’s breast andthen replaced the square of tin, soldering it neatly together where ithad been cut.“There,” said he; “now you have a heart that any man might be proud of.I’m sorry I had to put a patch on your breast, but it really couldn’tbe helped.”“Never mind the patch,” exclaimed the happy Woodman. “I am verygrateful to you, and shall never forget your kindness.”“Don’t speak of it,” replied Oz.Then the Tin Woodman went back to his friends, who wished him every joyon account of his good fortune.The Lion now walked to the Throne Room and knocked at the door.“Come in,” said Oz.“I have come for my courage,” announced the Lion, entering the room.“Very well,” answered the little man; “I will get it for you.”He went to a cupboard and reaching up to a high shelf took down asquare green bottle, the contents of which he poured into a green-golddish, beautifully carved. Placing this before the Cowardly Lion, whosniffed at it as if he did not like it, the Wizard said:“Drink.”“What is it?” asked the Lion.“Well,” answered Oz, “if it were inside of you, it would be courage.You know, of course, that courage is always inside one; so that thisreally cannot be called courage until you have swallowed it. ThereforeI advise you to drink it as soon as possible.”The Lion hesitated no longer, but drank till the dish was empty.“How do you feel now?” asked Oz.“Full of courage,” replied the Lion, who went joyfully back to hisfriends to tell them of his good fortune.Oz, left to himself, smiled to think of his success in giving theScarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion exactly what they thoughtthey wanted. “How can I help being a humbug,” he said, “when all thesepeople make me do things that everybody knows can’t be done? It waseasy to make the Scarecrow and the Lion and the Woodman happy, becausethey imagined I could do anything. But it will take more thanimagination to carry Dorothy back to Kansas, and I’m sure I don’t knowhow it can be done.”Chapter XVIIHow the Balloon Was LaunchedFor three days Dorothy heard nothing from Oz. These were sad days forthe little girl, although her friends were all quite happy andcontented. The Scarecrow told them there were wonderful thoughts in hishead; but he would not say what they were because he knew no one couldunderstand them but himself. When the Tin Woodman walked about he felthis heart rattling around in his breast; and he told Dorothy he haddiscovered it to be a kinder and more tender heart than the one he hadowned when he was made of flesh. The Lion declared he was afraid ofnothing on earth, and would gladly face an army or a dozen of thefierce Kalidahs.Thus each of the little party was satisfied except Dorothy, who longedmore than ever to get back to Kansas.On the fourth day, to her great joy, Oz sent for her, and when sheentered the Throne Room he greeted her pleasantly:“Sit down, my dear; I think I have found the way to get you out of thiscountry.”“And back to Kansas?” she asked eagerly.“Well, I’m not sure about Kansas,” said Oz, “for I haven’t the faintestnotion which way it lies. But the first thing to do is to cross thedesert, and then it should be easy to find your way home.”“How can I cross the desert?” she inquired.“Well, I’ll tell you what I think,” said the little man. “You see, whenI came to this country it was in a balloon. You also came through theair, being carried by a cyclone. So I believe the best way to getacross the desert will be through the air. Now, it is quite beyond mypowers to make a cyclone; but I’ve been thinking the matter over, and Ibelieve I can make a balloon.”“How?” asked Dorothy.“A balloon,” said Oz, “is made of silk, which is coated with glue tokeep the gas in it. I have plenty of silk in the Palace, so it will beno trouble to make the balloon. But in all this country there is no gasto fill the balloon with, to make it float.”“If it won’t float,” remarked Dorothy, “it will be of no use to us.”“True,” answered Oz. “But there is another way to make it float, whichis to fill it with hot air. Hot air isn’t as good as gas, for if theair should get cold the balloon would come down in the desert, and weshould be lost.”“We!” exclaimed the girl. “Are you going with me?”“Yes, of course,” replied Oz. “I am tired of being such a humbug. If Ishould go out of this Palace my people would soon discover I am not aWizard, and then they would be vexed with me for having deceived them.So I have to stay shut up in these rooms all day, and it gets tiresome.I’d much rather go back to Kansas with you and be in a circus again.”“I shall be glad to have your company,” said Dorothy.“Thank you,” he answered. “Now, if you will help me sew the silktogether, we will begin to work on our balloon.”So Dorothy took a needle and thread, and as fast as Oz cut the stripsof silk into proper shape the girl sewed them neatly together. Firstthere was a strip of light green silk, then a strip of dark green andthen a strip of emerald green; for Oz had a fancy to make the balloonin different shades of the color about them. It took three days to sewall the strips together, but when it was finished they had a big bag ofgreen silk more than twenty feet long.Then Oz painted it on the inside with a coat of thin glue, to make itairtight, after which he announced that the balloon was ready.“But we must have a basket to ride in,” he said. So he sent the soldierwith the green whiskers for a big clothes basket, which he fastenedwith many ropes to the bottom of the balloon.When it was all ready, Oz sent word to his people that he was going tomake a visit to a great brother Wizard who lived in the clouds. Thenews spread rapidly throughout the city and everyone came to see thewonderful sight.Oz ordered the balloon carried out in front of the Palace, and thepeople gazed upon it with much curiosity. The Tin Woodman had chopped abig pile of wood, and now he made a fire of it, and Oz held the bottomof the balloon over the fire so that the hot air that arose from itwould be caught in the silken bag. Gradually the balloon swelled outand rose into the air, until finally the basket just touched theground.Then Oz got into the basket and said to all the people in a loud voice:“I am now going away to make a visit. While I am gone the Scarecrowwill rule over you. I command you to obey him as you would me.”The balloon was by this time tugging hard at the rope that held it tothe ground, for the air within it was hot, and this made it so muchlighter in weight than the air without that it pulled hard to rise intothe sky.“Come, Dorothy!” cried the Wizard. “Hurry up, or the balloon will flyaway.”“I can’t find Toto anywhere,” replied Dorothy, who did not wish toleave her little dog behind. Toto had run into the crowd to bark at akitten, and Dorothy at last found him. She picked him up and rantowards the balloon.She was within a few steps of it, and Oz was holding out his hands tohelp her into the basket, when, crack! went the ropes, and the balloonrose into the air without her.“Come back!” she screamed. “I want to go, too!”“I can’t come back, my dear,” called Oz from the basket. “Good-bye!”“Good-bye!” shouted everyone, and all eyes were turned upward to wherethe Wizard was riding in the basket, rising every moment farther andfarther into the sky.And that was the last any of them ever saw of Oz, the Wonderful Wizard,though he may have reached Omaha safely, and be there now, for all weknow. But the people remembered him lovingly, and said to one another:“Oz was always our friend. When he was here he built for us thisbeautiful Emerald City, and now he is gone he has left the WiseScarecrow to rule over us.”Still, for many days they grieved over the loss of the WonderfulWizard, and would not be comforted.Chapter XVIIIAway to the SouthDorothy wept bitterly at the passing of her hope to get home to Kansasagain; but when she thought it all over she was glad she had not goneup in a balloon. And she also felt sorry at losing Oz, and so did hercompanions.The Tin Woodman came to her and said:“Truly I should be ungrateful if I failed to mourn for the man who gaveme my lovely heart. I should like to cry a little because Oz is gone,if you will kindly wipe away my tears, so that I shall not rust.”“With pleasure,” she answered, and brought a towel at once. Then theTin Woodman wept for several minutes, and she watched the tearscarefully and wiped them away with the towel. When he had finished, hethanked her kindly and oiled himself thoroughly with his jeweledoil-can, to guard against mishap.The Scarecrow was now the ruler of the Emerald City, and although hewas not a Wizard the people were proud of him. “For,” they said, “thereis not another city in all the world that is ruled by a stuffed man.”And, so far as they knew, they were quite right.The morning after the balloon had gone up with Oz, the four travelersmet in the Throne Room and talked matters over. The Scarecrow sat inthe big throne and the others stood respectfully before him.“We are not so unlucky,” said the new ruler, “for this Palace and theEmerald City belong to us, and we can do just as we please. When Iremember that a short time ago I was up on a pole in a farmer’scornfield, and that now I am the ruler of this beautiful City, I amquite satisfied with my lot.”“I also,” said the Tin Woodman, “am well-pleased with my new heart;and, really, that was the only thing I wished in all the world.”“For my part, I am content in knowing I am as brave as any beast thatever lived, if not braver,” said the Lion modestly.“If Dorothy would only be contented to live in the Emerald City,”continued the Scarecrow, “we might all be happy together.”“But I don’t want to live here,” cried Dorothy. “I want to go toKansas, and live with Aunt Em and Uncle Henry.”“Well, then, what can be done?” inquired the Woodman.The Scarecrow decided to think, and he thought so hard that the pinsand needles began to stick out of his brains. Finally he said:“Why not call the Winged Monkeys, and ask them to carry you over thedesert?”“I never thought of that!” said Dorothy joyfully. “It’s just the thing.I’ll go at once for the Golden Cap.”When she brought it into the Throne Room she spoke the magic words, andsoon the band of Winged Monkeys flew in through the open window andstood beside her.“This is the second time you have called us,” said the Monkey King,bowing before the little girl. “What do you wish?”“I want you to fly with me to Kansas,” said Dorothy.But the Monkey King shook his head.“That cannot be done,” he said. “We belong to this country alone, andcannot leave it. There has never been a Winged Monkey in Kansas yet,and I suppose there never will be, for they don’t belong there. Weshall be glad to serve you in any way in our power, but we cannot crossthe desert. Good-bye.”And with another bow, the Monkey King spread his wings and flew awaythrough the window, followed by all his band.Dorothy was ready to cry with disappointment. “I have wasted the charmof the Golden Cap to no purpose,” she said, “for the Winged Monkeyscannot help me.”“It is certainly too bad!” said the tender-hearted Woodman.The Scarecrow was thinking again, and his head bulged out so horriblythat Dorothy feared it would burst.“Let us call in the soldier with the green whiskers,” he said, “and askhis advice.”So the soldier was summoned and entered the Throne Room timidly, forwhile Oz was alive he never was allowed to come farther than the door.“This little girl,” said the Scarecrow to the soldier, “wishes to crossthe desert. How can she do so?”“I cannot tell,” answered the soldier, “for nobody has ever crossed thedesert, unless it is Oz himself.”“Is there no one who can help me?” asked Dorothy earnestly.“Glinda might,” he suggested.“Who is Glinda?” inquired the Scarecrow.“The Witch of the South. She is the most powerful of all the Witches,and rules over the Quadlings. Besides, her castle stands on the edge ofthe desert, so she may know a way to cross it.”“Glinda is a Good Witch, isn’t she?” asked the child.“The Quadlings think she is good,” said the soldier, “and she is kindto everyone. I have heard that Glinda is a beautiful woman, who knowshow to keep young in spite of the many years she has lived.”“How can I get to her castle?” asked Dorothy.“The road is straight to the South,” he answered, “but it is said to befull of dangers to travelers. There are wild beasts in the woods, and arace of queer men who do not like strangers to cross their country. Forthis reason none of the Quadlings ever come to the Emerald City.”The soldier then left them and the Scarecrow said:“It seems, in spite of dangers, that the best thing Dorothy can do isto travel to the Land of the South and ask Glinda to help her. For, ofcourse, if Dorothy stays here she will never get back to Kansas.”“You must have been thinking again,” remarked the Tin Woodman.“I have,” said the Scarecrow.“I shall go with Dorothy,” declared the Lion, “for I am tired of yourcity and long for the woods and the country again. I am really a wildbeast, you know. Besides, Dorothy will need someone to protect her.”“That is true,” agreed the Woodman. “My axe may be of service to her;so I also will go with her to the Land of the South.”“When shall we start?” asked the Scarecrow.“Are you going?” they asked, in surprise.“Certainly. If it wasn’t for Dorothy I should never have had brains.She lifted me from the pole in the cornfield and brought me to theEmerald City. So my good luck is all due to her, and I shall neverleave her until she starts back to Kansas for good and all.”“Thank you,” said Dorothy gratefully. “You are all very kind to me. ButI should like to start as soon as possible.”“We shall go tomorrow morning,” returned the Scarecrow. “So now let usall get ready, for it will be a long journey.”Chapter XIXAttacked by the Fighting TreesThe next morning Dorothy kissed the pretty green girl good-bye, andthey all shook hands with the soldier with the green whiskers, who hadwalked with them as far as the gate. When the Guardian of the Gate sawthem again he wondered greatly that they could leave the beautiful Cityto get into new trouble. But he at once unlocked their spectacles,which he put back into the green box, and gave them many good wishes tocarry with them.“You are now our ruler,” he said to the Scarecrow; “so you must comeback to us as soon as possible.”“I certainly shall if I am able,” the Scarecrow replied; “but I musthelp Dorothy to get home, first.”As Dorothy bade the good-natured Guardian a last farewell she said:“I have been very kindly treated in your lovely City, and everyone hasbeen good to me. I cannot tell you how grateful I am.”“Don’t try, my dear,” he answered. “We should like to keep you with us,but if it is your wish to return to Kansas, I hope you will find away.” He then opened the gate of the outer wall, and they walked forthand started upon their journey.The sun shone brightly as our friends turned their faces toward theLand of the South. They were all in the best of spirits, and laughedand chatted together. Dorothy was once more filled with the hope ofgetting home, and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman were glad to be ofuse to her. As for the Lion, he sniffed the fresh air with delight andwhisked his tail from side to side in pure joy at being in the countryagain, while Toto ran around them and chased the moths and butterflies,barking merrily all the time.“City life does not agree with me at all,” remarked the Lion, as theywalked along at a brisk pace. “I have lost much flesh since I livedthere, and now I am anxious for a chance to show the other beasts howcourageous I have grown.”They now turned and took a last look at the Emerald City. All theycould see was a mass of towers and steeples behind the green walls, andhigh up above everything the spires and dome of the Palace of Oz.“Oz was not such a bad Wizard, after all,” said the Tin Woodman, as hefelt his heart rattling around in his breast.“He knew how to give me brains, and very good brains, too,” said theScarecrow.“If Oz had taken a dose of the same courage he gave me,” added theLion, “he would have been a brave man.”Dorothy said nothing. Oz had not kept the promise he made her, but hehad done his best, so she forgave him. As he said, he was a good man,even if he was a bad Wizard.The first day’s journey was through the green fields and bright flowersthat stretched about the Emerald City on every side. They slept thatnight on the grass, with nothing but the stars over them; and theyrested very well indeed.In the morning they traveled on until they came to a thick wood. Therewas no way of going around it, for it seemed to extend to the right andleft as far as they could see; and, besides, they did not dare changethe direction of their journey for fear of getting lost. So they lookedfor the place where it would be easiest to get into the forest.The Scarecrow, who was in the lead, finally discovered a big tree withsuch wide-spreading branches that there was room for the party to passunderneath. So he walked forward to the tree, but just as he came underthe first branches they bent down and twined around him, and the nextminute he was raised from the ground and flung headlong among hisfellow travelers.This did not hurt the Scarecrow, but it surprised him, and he lookedrather dizzy when Dorothy picked him up.“Here is another space between the trees,” called the Lion.“Let me try it first,” said the Scarecrow, “for it doesn’t hurt me toget thrown about.” He walked up to another tree, as he spoke, but itsbranches immediately seized him and tossed him back again.“This is strange,” exclaimed Dorothy. “What shall we do?”“The trees seem to have made up their minds to fight us, and stop ourjourney,” remarked the Lion.“I believe I will try it myself,” said the Woodman, and shouldering hisaxe, he marched up to the first tree that had handled the Scarecrow soroughly. When a big branch bent down to seize him the Woodman choppedat it so fiercely that he cut it in two. At once the tree began shakingall its branches as if in pain, and the Tin Woodman passed safely underit.“Come on!” he shouted to the others. “Be quick!” They all ran forwardand passed under the tree without injury, except Toto, who was caughtby a small branch and shaken until he howled. But the Woodman promptlychopped off the branch and set the little dog free.The other trees of the forest did nothing to keep them back, so theymade up their minds that only the first row of trees could bend downtheir branches, and that probably these were the policemen of theforest, and given this wonderful power in order to keep strangers outof it.The four travelers walked with ease through the trees until they cameto the farther edge of the wood. Then, to their surprise, they foundbefore them a high wall which seemed to be made of white china. It wassmooth, like the surface of a dish, and higher than their heads.“What shall we do now?” asked Dorothy.“I will make a ladder,” said the Tin Woodman, “for we certainly mustclimb over the wall.”Chapter XXThe Dainty China CountryWhile the Woodman was making a ladder from wood which he found in theforest Dorothy lay down and slept, for she was tired by the long walk.The Lion also curled himself up to sleep and Toto lay beside him.The Scarecrow watched the Woodman while he worked, and said to him:“I cannot think why this wall is here, nor what it is made of.”“Rest your brains and do not worry about the wall,” replied theWoodman. “When we have climbed over it, we shall know what is on theother side.”After a time the ladder was finished. It looked clumsy, but the TinWoodman was sure it was strong and would answer their purpose. TheScarecrow waked Dorothy and the Lion and Toto, and told them that theladder was ready. The Scarecrow climbed up the ladder first, but he wasso awkward that Dorothy had to follow close behind and keep him fromfalling off. When he got his head over the top of the wall theScarecrow said, “Oh, my!”“Go on,” exclaimed Dorothy.So the Scarecrow climbed farther up and sat down on the top of thewall, and Dorothy put her head over and cried, “Oh, my!” just as theScarecrow had done.Then Toto came up, and immediately began to bark, but Dorothy made himbe still.The Lion climbed the ladder next, and the Tin Woodman came last; butboth of them cried, “Oh, my!” as soon as they looked over the wall.When they were all sitting in a row on the top of the wall, they lookeddown and saw a strange sight.Before them was a great stretch of country having a floor as smooth andshining and white as the bottom of a big platter. Scattered around weremany houses made entirely of china and painted in the brightest colors.These houses were quite small, the biggest of them reaching only ashigh as Dorothy’s waist. There were also pretty little barns, withchina fences around them; and many cows and sheep and horses and pigsand chickens, all made of china, were standing about in groups.But the strangest of all were the people who lived in this queercountry. There were milkmaids and shepherdesses, with brightly coloredbodices and golden spots all over their gowns; and princesses with mostgorgeous frocks of silver and gold and purple; and shepherds dressed inknee breeches with pink and yellow and blue stripes down them, andgolden buckles on their shoes; and princes with jeweled crowns upontheir heads, wearing ermine robes and satin doublets; and funny clownsin ruffled gowns, with round red spots upon their cheeks and tall,pointed caps. And, strangest of all, these people were all made ofchina, even to their clothes, and were so small that the tallest ofthem was no higher than Dorothy’s knee.No one did so much as look at the travelers at first, except one littlepurple china dog with an extra-large head, which came to the wall andbarked at them in a tiny voice, afterwards running away again.“How shall we get down?” asked Dorothy.They found the ladder so heavy they could not pull it up, so theScarecrow fell off the wall and the others jumped down upon him so thatthe hard floor would not hurt their feet. Of course they took pains notto light on his head and get the pins in their feet. When all weresafely down they picked up the Scarecrow, whose body was quiteflattened out, and patted his straw into shape again.“We must cross this strange place in order to get to the other side,”said Dorothy, “for it would be unwise for us to go any other way exceptdue South.”They began walking through the country of the china people, and thefirst thing they came to was a china milkmaid milking a china cow. Asthey drew near, the cow suddenly gave a kick and kicked over the stool,the pail, and even the milkmaid herself, and all fell on the chinaground with a great clatter.Dorothy was shocked to see that the cow had broken her leg off, andthat the pail was lying in several small pieces, while the poormilkmaid had a nick in her left elbow.“There!” cried the milkmaid angrily. “See what you have done! My cowhas broken her leg, and I must take her to the mender’s shop and haveit glued on again. What do you mean by coming here and frightening mycow?”“I’m very sorry,” returned Dorothy. “Please forgive us.”But the pretty milkmaid was much too vexed to make any answer. Shepicked up the leg sulkily and led her cow away, the poor animal limpingon three legs. As she left them the milkmaid cast many reproachfulglances over her shoulder at the clumsy strangers, holding her nickedelbow close to her side.Dorothy was quite grieved at this mishap.“We must be very careful here,” said the kind-hearted Woodman, “or wemay hurt these pretty little people so they will never get over it.”A little farther on Dorothy met a most beautifully dressed youngPrincess, who stopped short as she saw the strangers and started to runaway.Dorothy wanted to see more of the Princess, so she ran after her. Butthe china girl cried out:“Don’t chase me! Don’t chase me!”She had such a frightened little voice that Dorothy stopped and said,“Why not?”“Because,” answered the Princess, also stopping, a safe distance away,“if I run I may fall down and break myself.”“But could you not be mended?” asked the girl.“Oh, yes; but one is never so pretty after being mended, you know,”replied the Princess.“I suppose not,” said Dorothy.“Now there is Mr. Joker, one of our clowns,” continued the china lady,“who is always trying to stand upon his head. He has broken himself sooften that he is mended in a hundred places, and doesn’t look at allpretty. Here he comes now, so you can see for yourself.”Indeed, a jolly little clown came walking toward them, and Dorothycould see that in spite of his pretty clothes of red and yellow andgreen he was completely covered with cracks, running every which wayand showing plainly that he had been mended in many places.The Clown put his hands in his pockets, and after puffing out hischeeks and nodding his head at them saucily, he said:“My lady fair,Why do you stareAt poor old Mr. Joker?You’re quite as stiffAnd prim as ifYou’d eaten up a poker!”“Be quiet, sir!” said the Princess. “Can’t you see these are strangers,and should be treated with respect?”“Well, that’s respect, I expect,” declared the Clown, and immediatelystood upon his head.“Don’t mind Mr. Joker,” said the Princess to Dorothy. “He isconsiderably cracked in his head, and that makes him foolish.”“Oh, I don’t mind him a bit,” said Dorothy. “But you are so beautiful,”she continued, “that I am sure I could love you dearly. Won’t you letme carry you back to Kansas, and stand you on Aunt Em’s mantel? I couldcarry you in my basket.”“That would make me very unhappy,” answered the china Princess. “Yousee, here in our country we live contentedly, and can talk and movearound as we please. But whenever any of us are taken away our jointsat once stiffen, and we can only stand straight and look pretty. Ofcourse that is all that is expected of us when we are on mantels andcabinets and drawing-room tables, but our lives are much pleasanterhere in our own country.”“I would not make you unhappy for all the world!” exclaimed Dorothy.“So I’ll just say good-bye.”“Good-bye,” replied the Princess.They walked carefully through the china country. The little animals andall the people scampered out of their way, fearing the strangers wouldbreak them, and after an hour or so the travelers reached the otherside of the country and came to another china wall.It was not so high as the first, however, and by standing upon theLion’s back they all managed to scramble to the top. Then the Liongathered his legs under him and jumped on the wall; but just as hejumped, he upset a china church with his tail and smashed it all topieces.“That was too bad,” said Dorothy, “but really I think we were lucky innot doing these little people more harm than breaking a cow’s leg and achurch. They are all so brittle!”“They are, indeed,” said the Scarecrow, “and I am thankful I am made ofstraw and cannot be easily damaged. There are worse things in the worldthan being a Scarecrow.”Chapter XXIThe Lion Becomes the King of BeastsAfter climbing down from the china wall the travelers found themselvesin a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and covered withtall, rank grass. It was difficult to walk without falling into muddyholes, for the grass was so thick that it hid them from sight. However,by carefully picking their way, they got safely along until theyreached solid ground. But here the country seemed wilder than ever, andafter a long and tiresome walk through the underbrush they enteredanother forest, where the trees were bigger and older than any they hadever seen.“This forest is perfectly delightful,” declared the Lion, lookingaround him with joy. “Never have I seen a more beautiful place.”“It seems gloomy,” said the Scarecrow.“Not a bit of it,” answered the Lion. “I should like to live here allmy life. See how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how richand green the moss is that clings to these old trees. Surely no wildbeast could wish a pleasanter home.”“Perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now,” said Dorothy.“I suppose there are,” returned the Lion, “but I do not see any of themabout.”They walked through the forest until it became too dark to go anyfarther. Dorothy and Toto and the Lion lay down to sleep, while theWoodman and the Scarecrow kept watch over them as usual.When morning came, they started again. Before they had gone far theyheard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals. Totowhimpered a little, but none of the others was frightened, and theykept along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in thewood, in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every variety. Therewere tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and foxes and all theothers in the natural history, and for a moment Dorothy was afraid. Butthe Lion explained that the animals were holding a meeting, and hejudged by their snarling and growling that they were in great trouble.As he spoke several of the beasts caught sight of him, and at once thegreat assemblage hushed as if by magic. The biggest of the tigers cameup to the Lion and bowed, saying:“Welcome, O King of Beasts! You have come in good time to fight ourenemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more.”“What is your trouble?” asked the Lion quietly.“We are all threatened,” answered the tiger, “by a fierce enemy whichhas lately come into this forest. It is a most tremendous monster, likea great spider, with a body as big as an elephant and legs as long as atree trunk. It has eight of these long legs, and as the monster crawlsthrough the forest he seizes an animal with a leg and drags it to hismouth, where he eats it as a spider does a fly. Not one of us is safewhile this fierce creature is alive, and we had called a meeting todecide how to take care of ourselves when you came among us.”The Lion thought for a moment.“Are there any other lions in this forest?” he asked.“No; there were some, but the monster has eaten them all. And, besides,they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you.”“If I put an end to your enemy, will you bow down to me and obey me asKing of the Forest?” inquired the Lion.“We will do that gladly,” returned the tiger; and all the other beastsroared with a mighty roar: “We will!”“Where is this great spider of yours now?” asked the Lion.“Yonder, among the oak trees,” said the tiger, pointing with hisforefoot.“Take good care of these friends of mine,” said the Lion, “and I willgo at once to fight the monster.”He bade his comrades good-bye and marched proudly away to do battlewith the enemy.The great spider was lying asleep when the Lion found him, and itlooked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust. Its legswere quite as long as the tiger had said, and its body covered withcoarse black hair. It had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth afoot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck asslender as a wasp’s waist. This gave the Lion a hint of the best way toattack the creature, and as he knew it was easier to fight it asleepthan awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon themonster’s back. Then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed withsharp claws, he knocked the spider’s head from its body. Jumping down,he watched it until the long legs stopped wiggling, when he knew it wasquite dead.The Lion went back to the opening where the beasts of the forest werewaiting for him and said proudly:“You need fear your enemy no longer.”Then the beasts bowed down to the Lion as their King, and he promisedto come back and rule over them as soon as Dorothy was safely on herway to Kansas.Chapter XXIIThe Country of the QuadlingsThe four travelers passed through the rest of the forest in safety, andwhen they came out from its gloom saw before them a steep hill, coveredfrom top to bottom with great pieces of rock.“That will be a hard climb,” said the Scarecrow, “but we must get overthe hill, nevertheless.”So he led the way and the others followed. They had nearly reached thefirst rock when they heard a rough voice cry out, “Keep back!”“Who are you?” asked the Scarecrow.Then a head showed itself over the rock and the same voice said, “Thishill belongs to us, and we don’t allow anyone to cross it.”“But we must cross it,” said the Scarecrow. “We’re going to the countryof the Quadlings.”“But you shall not!” replied the voice, and there stepped from behindthe rock the strangest man the travelers had ever seen.He was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at thetop and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles. But he had no armsat all, and, seeing this, the Scarecrow did not fear that so helpless acreature could prevent them from climbing the hill. So he said, “I’msorry not to do as you wish, but we must pass over your hill whetheryou like it or not,” and he walked boldly forward.As quick as lightning the man’s head shot forward and his neckstretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck theScarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over, down thehill. Almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the body, andthe man laughed harshly as he said, “It isn’t as easy as you think!”A chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and Dorothysaw hundreds of the armless Hammer-Heads upon the hillside, one behindevery rock.The Lion became quite angry at the laughter caused by the Scarecrow’smishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder, he dashed upthe hill.Again a head shot swiftly out, and the great Lion went rolling down thehill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball.Dorothy ran down and helped the Scarecrow to his feet, and the Lioncame up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said, “It isuseless to fight people with shooting heads; no one can withstandthem.”“What can we do, then?” she asked.“Call the Winged Monkeys,” suggested the Tin Woodman. “You have stillthe right to command them once more.”“Very well,” she answered, and putting on the Golden Cap she utteredthe magic words. The Monkeys were as prompt as ever, and in a fewmoments the entire band stood before her.“What are your commands?” inquired the King of the Monkeys, bowing low.“Carry us over the hill to the country of the Quadlings,” answered thegirl.“It shall be done,” said the King, and at once the Winged Monkeyscaught the four travelers and Toto up in their arms and flew away withthem. As they passed over the hill the Hammer-Heads yelled withvexation, and shot their heads high in the air, but they could notreach the Winged Monkeys, which carried Dorothy and her comrades safelyover the hill and set them down in the beautiful country of theQuadlings.“This is the last time you can summon us,” said the leader to Dorothy;“so good-bye and good luck to you.”“Good-bye, and thank you very much,” returned the girl; and the Monkeysrose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling.The country of the Quadlings seemed rich and happy. There was fieldupon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running between,and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them. The fencesand houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as they hadbeen painted yellow in the country of the Winkies and blue in thecountry of the Munchkins. The Quadlings themselves, who were short andfat and looked chubby and good-natured, were dressed all in red, whichshowed bright against the green grass and the yellowing grain.The Monkeys had set them down near a farmhouse, and the four travelerswalked up to it and knocked at the door. It was opened by the farmer’swife, and when Dorothy asked for something to eat the woman gave themall a good dinner, with three kinds of cake and four kinds of cookies,and a bowl of milk for Toto.“How far is it to the Castle of Glinda?” asked the child.“It is not a great way,” answered the farmer’s wife. “Take the road tothe South and you will soon reach it.”Thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the fieldsand across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a verybeautiful Castle. Before the gates were three young girls, dressed inhandsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid; and as Dorothyapproached, one of them said to her:“Why have you come to the South Country?”“To see the Good Witch who rules here,” she answered. “Will you take meto her?”“Let me have your name, and I will ask Glinda if she will receive you.”They told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the Castle.After a few moments she came back to say that Dorothy and the otherswere to be admitted at once.Chapter XXIIIGlinda The Good Witch Grants Dorothy’s WishBefore they went to see Glinda, however, they were taken to a room ofthe Castle, where Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair, and theLion shook the dust out of his mane, and the Scarecrow patted himselfinto his best shape, and the Woodman polished his tin and oiled hisjoints.When they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier girlinto a big room where the Witch Glinda sat upon a throne of rubies.She was both beautiful and young to their eyes. Her hair was a rich redin color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders. Her dress waspure white but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly upon thelittle girl.“What can I do for you, my child?” she asked.Dorothy told the Witch all her story: how the cyclone had brought herto the Land of Oz, how she had found her companions, and of thewonderful adventures they had met with.“My greatest wish now,” she added, “is to get back to Kansas, for AuntEm will surely think something dreadful has happened to me, and thatwill make her put on mourning; and unless the crops are better thisyear than they were last, I am sure Uncle Henry cannot afford it.”Glinda leaned forward and kissed the sweet, upturned face of the lovinglittle girl.“Bless your dear heart,” she said, “I am sure I can tell you of a wayto get back to Kansas.” Then she added, “But, if I do, you must give methe Golden Cap.”“Willingly!” exclaimed Dorothy; “indeed, it is of no use to me now, andwhen you have it you can command the Winged Monkeys three times.”“And I think I shall need their service just those three times,”answered Glinda, smiling.Dorothy then gave her the Golden Cap, and the Witch said to theScarecrow, “What will you do when Dorothy has left us?”“I will return to the Emerald City,” he replied, “for Oz has made meits ruler and the people like me. The only thing that worries me is howto cross the hill of the Hammer-Heads.”“By means of the Golden Cap I shall command the Winged Monkeys to carryyou to the gates of the Emerald City,” said Glinda, “for it would be ashame to deprive the people of so wonderful a ruler.”“Am I really wonderful?” asked the Scarecrow.“You are unusual,” replied Glinda.Turning to the Tin Woodman, she asked, “What will become of you whenDorothy leaves this country?”He leaned on his axe and thought a moment. Then he said, “The Winkieswere very kind to me, and wanted me to rule over them after the WickedWitch died. I am fond of the Winkies, and if I could get back again tothe Country of the West, I should like nothing better than to rule overthem forever.”“My second command to the Winged Monkeys,” said Glinda “will be thatthey carry you safely to the land of the Winkies. Your brain may not beso large to look at as those of the Scarecrow, but you are reallybrighter than he is—when you are well polished—and I am sure you willrule the Winkies wisely and well.”Then the Witch looked at the big, shaggy Lion and asked, “When Dorothyhas returned to her own home, what will become of you?”“Over the hill of the Hammer-Heads,” he answered, “lies a grand oldforest, and all the beasts that live there have made me their King. IfI could only get back to this forest, I would pass my life very happilythere.”“My third command to the Winged Monkeys,” said Glinda, “shall be tocarry you to your forest. Then, having used up the powers of the GoldenCap, I shall give it to the King of the Monkeys, that he and his bandmay thereafter be free for evermore.”The Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman and the Lion now thanked the GoodWitch earnestly for her kindness; and Dorothy exclaimed:“You are certainly as good as you are beautiful! But you have not yettold me how to get back to Kansas.”“Your Silver Shoes will carry you over the desert,” replied Glinda. “Ifyou had known their power you could have gone back to your Aunt Em thevery first day you came to this country.”“But then I should not have had my wonderful brains!” cried theScarecrow. “I might have passed my whole life in the farmer’scornfield.”“And I should not have had my lovely heart,” said the Tin Woodman. “Imight have stood and rusted in the forest till the end of the world.”“And I should have lived a coward forever,” declared the Lion, “and nobeast in all the forest would have had a good word to say to me.”“This is all true,” said Dorothy, “and I am glad I was of use to thesegood friends. But now that each of them has had what he most desired,and each is happy in having a kingdom to rule besides, I think I shouldlike to go back to Kansas.”“The Silver Shoes,” said the Good Witch, “have wonderful powers. Andone of the most curious things about them is that they can carry you toany place in the world in three steps, and each step will be made inthe wink of an eye. All you have to do is to knock the heels togetherthree times and command the shoes to carry you wherever you wish togo.”“If that is so,” said the child joyfully, “I will ask them to carry meback to Kansas at once.”She threw her arms around the Lion’s neck and kissed him, patting hisbig head tenderly. Then she kissed the Tin Woodman, who was weeping ina way most dangerous to his joints. But she hugged the soft, stuffedbody of the Scarecrow in her arms instead of kissing his painted face,and found she was crying herself at this sorrowful parting from herloving comrades.Glinda the Good stepped down from her ruby throne to give the littlegirl a good-bye kiss, and Dorothy thanked her for all the kindness shehad shown to her friends and herself.Dorothy now took Toto up solemnly in her arms, and having said one lastgood-bye she clapped the heels of her shoes together three times,saying:“Take me home to Aunt Em!”Instantly she was whirling through the air, so swiftly that all shecould see or feel was the wind whistling past her ears.The Silver Shoes took but three steps, and then she stopped so suddenlythat she rolled over upon the grass several times before she knew whereshe was.At length, however, she sat up and looked about her.“Good gracious!” she cried.For she was sitting on the broad Kansas prairie, and just before herwas the new farmhouse Uncle Henry built after the cyclone had carriedaway the old one. Uncle Henry was milking the cows in the barnyard, andToto had jumped out of her arms and was running toward the barn,barking furiously.Dorothy stood up and found she was in her stocking-feet. For the SilverShoes had fallen off in her flight through the air, and were lostforever in the desert.Chapter XXIVHome AgainAunt Em had just come out of the house to water the cabbages when shelooked up and saw Dorothy running toward her.“My darling child!” she cried, folding the little girl in her arms andcovering her face with kisses. “Where in the world did you come from?”“From the Land of Oz,” said Dorothy gravely. “And here is Toto, too.And oh, Aunt Em! I’m so glad to be at home again!”*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WONDERFUL WIZARD OF OZ ******** This file should be named 55-0.txt or 55-0.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:https://www.gutenberg.org/5/55/Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in theUnited States without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmconcept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from theperson or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph1.E.8.1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("theFoundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tmworks in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any workon which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and with almost norestrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use itunder the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with thiseBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in theUnited States, you will have to check the laws of the country whereyou are located before using this eBook.1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tmtrademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a formatother than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "PlainVanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksprovided that:* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive fromthe use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the methodyou already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owedto the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he hasagreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paidwithin 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or arelegally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royaltypayments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified inSection 4, "Information about donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation."* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifiesyou in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/hedoes not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense. You must require such a user to return or destroy allcopies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinueall use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tmworks.* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund ofany money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in theelectronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days ofreceipt of the work.* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for freedistribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page atwww.gutenberg.orgSection 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state's laws.The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation's websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive withoutwidespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particularstate visit www.gutenberg.org/donateWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.orgThis website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-----
ALG
﻿[Illustration]THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASSAnd What Alice Found ThereBy Lewis CarrollThe Millennium Fulcrum Edition 1.7DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.(_As arranged before commencement of game._)WHITE                        RED.PIECES.        PAWNS.        PAWNS.      PIECES.Tweedledee.    Daisy.        Daisy.      Humpty Dumpty.Unicorn.       Haigha.       Messenger.  Carpenter.Sheep.         Oyster.       Oyster.     Walrus.W. Queen.      “Lily.”       Tiger-lily. R. Queen.W. King.       Fawn.         Rose.       R. King.Aged man.      Oyster.       Oyster.     Crow.W. Knight.     Hatta.        Frog.       R. Knight.Tweedledum.    Daisy.        Daisy.      Lion._RED._[Illustration: chessboard]_WHITE._White Pawn (Alice) to play, and win in eleven moves.1. Alice meets R. Q.1. R. Q. to K. R.’s 4th2. Alice through Q.’s 3d (_by railwayv) to 4th (_Tweedledum and Tweedledee_)2. W. Q. to Q. B.’s 4th (_after shawl_)3. Alice meets W. Q. (_with shawl_)3. W. Q. to Q.B.’s 5th (_becomes sheep_)4. Alice to Q.’s 5th (_shop, river, shop_)4. W. Q. to K. B.’s 8th (_leaves egg on shelf_)5. Alice to Q.’s 6th (_Humpty Dumpty_)5. W. Q. to Q. B.’s 8th (_flying from R. Kt._)6. Alice to Q.’s 7th (_forest_)6. R. Kt. to K.’s 2nd (ch.)7. W.Kt. takes R.Kt.7. W. Kt. to K. B’s 5th8. Alice to Q.’s 8th (_coronation_)8. R. Q. to K.’s sq. (_examination_)9. Alice becomes Queen9. Queens castle10. Alice castles (_feast_)10. W.Q. to Q.R.’s 6th (_soup_)11. Alice takes R.Q. & winsChild of the pure unclouded browAnd dreaming eyes of wonder!Though time be fleet, and I and thouAre half a life asunder,Thy loving smile will surely hailThe love-gift of a fairy-tale.I have not seen thy sunny face,Nor heard thy silver laughter;No thought of me shall find a placeIn thy young life’s hereafter—Enough that now thou wilt not failTo listen to my fairy-tale.A tale begun in other days,When summer suns were glowing—A simple chime, that served to timeThe rhythm of oar rowing—Whose echoes live in memory yet,Though envious years would say ‘forget.’Come, hearken then, ere voice of dread.With bitter tidings laden,Shall summon to unwelcome bedA melancholy maiden!We are but older children, dear,Who fret to find our bedtime near.Without, the frost, the blinding snow.The storm-wind’s moody madness—Within, the firelight’s ruddy glow,And childhood’s nest of gladness.The magic words shall hold thee fast:Thou shalt not heed the raving blast.And though the shadow of a sighMay tremble through the story,For ‘happy summer days’ gone by,And vanish’d summer glory—It shall not touch with breath of baleThe pleasance of our fairy-tale.ContentsCHAPTER I. Looking-Glass houseCHAPTER II. The Garden of Live FlowersCHAPTER III. Looking-Glass InsectsCHAPTER IV. Tweedledum And TweedledeeCHAPTER V. Wool and WaterCHAPTER VI. Humpty DumptyCHAPTER VII. The Lion and the UnicornCHAPTER VIII. “It’s my own Invention”CHAPTER IX. Queen AliceCHAPTER X. ShakingCHAPTER XI. WakingCHAPTER XII. Which Dreamed it?CHAPTER I.Looking-Glass houseOne thing was certain, that the _white_ kitten had had nothing to dowith it:—it was the black kitten’s fault entirely. For the white kittenhad been having its face washed by the old cat for the last quarter ofan hour (and bearing it pretty well, considering); so you see that it_couldn’t_ have had any hand in the mischief.The way Dinah washed her children’s faces was this: first she held thepoor thing down by its ear with one paw, and then with the other pawshe rubbed its face all over, the wrong way, beginning at the nose: andjust now, as I said, she was hard at work on the white kitten, whichwas lying quite still and trying to purr—no doubt feeling that it wasall meant for its good.But the black kitten had been finished with earlier in the afternoon,and so, while Alice was sitting curled up in a corner of the greatarm-chair, half talking to herself and half asleep, the kitten had beenhaving a grand game of romps with the ball of worsted Alice had beentrying to wind up, and had been rolling it up and down till it had allcome undone again; and there it was, spread over the hearth-rug, allknots and tangles, with the kitten running after its own tail in themiddle.“Oh, you wicked little thing!” cried Alice, catching up the kitten, andgiving it a little kiss to make it understand that it was in disgrace.“Really, Dinah ought to have taught you better manners! You _ought_,Dinah, you know you ought!” she added, looking reproachfully at the oldcat, and speaking in as cross a voice as she could manage—and then shescrambled back into the arm-chair, taking the kitten and the worstedwith her, and began winding up the ball again. But she didn’t get onvery fast, as she was talking all the time, sometimes to the kitten,and sometimes to herself. Kitty sat very demurely on her knee,pretending to watch the progress of the winding, and now and thenputting out one paw and gently touching the ball, as if it would beglad to help, if it might.“Do you know what to-morrow is, Kitty?” Alice began. “You’d haveguessed if you’d been up in the window with me—only Dinah was makingyou tidy, so you couldn’t. I was watching the boys getting in sticksfor the bonfire—and it wants plenty of sticks, Kitty! Only it got socold, and it snowed so, they had to leave off. Never mind, Kitty, we’llgo and see the bonfire to-morrow.” Here Alice wound two or three turnsof the worsted round the kitten’s neck, just to see how it would look:this led to a scramble, in which the ball rolled down upon the floor,and yards and yards of it got unwound again.“Do you know, I was so angry, Kitty,” Alice went on as soon as theywere comfortably settled again, “when I saw all the mischief you hadbeen doing, I was very nearly opening the window, and putting you outinto the snow! And you’d have deserved it, you little mischievousdarling! What have you got to say for yourself? Now don’t interruptme!” she went on, holding up one finger. “I’m going to tell you allyour faults. Number one: you squeaked twice while Dinah was washingyour face this morning. Now you can’t deny it, Kitty: I heard you!What’s that you say?” (pretending that the kitten was speaking.) “Herpaw went into your eye? Well, that’s _your_ fault, for keeping youreyes open—if you’d shut them tight up, it wouldn’t have happened. Nowdon’t make any more excuses, but listen! Number two: you pulledSnowdrop away by the tail just as I had put down the saucer of milkbefore her! What, you were thirsty, were you? How do you know shewasn’t thirsty too? Now for number three: you unwound every bit of theworsted while I wasn’t looking!“That’s three faults, Kitty, and you’ve not been punished for any ofthem yet. You know I’m saving up all your punishments for Wednesdayweek—Suppose they had saved up all _my_ punishments!” she went on,talking more to herself than the kitten. “What _would_ they do at theend of a year? I should be sent to prison, I suppose, when the daycame. Or—let me see—suppose each punishment was to be going without adinner: then, when the miserable day came, I should have to go withoutfifty dinners at once! Well, I shouldn’t mind _that_ much! I’d farrather go without them than eat them!“Do you hear the snow against the window-panes, Kitty? How nice andsoft it sounds! Just as if some one was kissing the window all overoutside. I wonder if the snow _loves_ the trees and fields, that itkisses them so gently? And then it covers them up snug, you know, witha white quilt; and perhaps it says, ‘Go to sleep, darlings, till thesummer comes again.’ And when they wake up in the summer, Kitty, theydress themselves all in green, and dance about—whenever the windblows—oh, that’s very pretty!” cried Alice, dropping the ball ofworsted to clap her hands. “And I do so _wish_ it was true! I’m surethe woods look sleepy in the autumn, when the leaves are getting brown.“Kitty, can you play chess? Now, don’t smile, my dear, I’m asking itseriously. Because, when we were playing just now, you watched just asif you understood it: and when I said ‘Check!’ you purred! Well, it_was_ a nice check, Kitty, and really I might have won, if it hadn’tbeen for that nasty Knight, that came wiggling down among my pieces.Kitty, dear, let’s pretend—” And here I wish I could tell you half thethings Alice used to say, beginning with her favourite phrase “Let’spretend.” She had had quite a long argument with her sister only theday before—all because Alice had begun with “Let’s pretend we’re kingsand queens;” and her sister, who liked being very exact, had arguedthat they couldn’t, because there were only two of them, and Alice hadbeen reduced at last to say, “Well, _you_ can be one of them then, and_I’ll_ be all the rest.” And once she had really frightened her oldnurse by shouting suddenly in her ear, “Nurse! Do let’s pretend thatI’m a hungry hyaena, and you’re a bone.”But this is taking us away from Alice’s speech to the kitten. “Let’spretend that you’re the Red Queen, Kitty! Do you know, I think if yousat up and folded your arms, you’d look exactly like her. Now do try,there’s a dear!” And Alice got the Red Queen off the table, and set itup before the kitten as a model for it to imitate: however, the thingdidn’t succeed, principally, Alice said, because the kitten wouldn’tfold its arms properly. So, to punish it, she held it up to theLooking-glass, that it might see how sulky it was—“and if you’re notgood directly,” she added, “I’ll put you through into Looking-glassHouse. How would you like _that_?”“Now, if you’ll only attend, Kitty, and not talk so much, I’ll tell youall my ideas about Looking-glass House. First, there’s the room you cansee through the glass—that’s just the same as our drawing room, onlythe things go the other way. I can see all of it when I get upon achair—all but the bit behind the fireplace. Oh! I do so wish I couldsee _that_ bit! I want so much to know whether they’ve a fire in thewinter: you never _can_ tell, you know, unless our fire smokes, andthen smoke comes up in that room too—but that may be only pretence,just to make it look as if they had a fire. Well then, the books aresomething like our books, only the words go the wrong way; I know that,because I’ve held up one of our books to the glass, and then they holdup one in the other room.“How would you like to live in Looking-glass House, Kitty? I wonder ifthey’d give you milk in there? Perhaps Looking-glass milk isn’t good todrink—But oh, Kitty! now we come to the passage. You can just see alittle _peep_ of the passage in Looking-glass House, if you leave thedoor of our drawing-room wide open: and it’s very like our passage asfar as you can see, only you know it may be quite different on beyond.Oh, Kitty! how nice it would be if we could only get through intoLooking-glass House! I’m sure it’s got, oh! such beautiful things init! Let’s pretend there’s a way of getting through into it, somehow,Kitty. Let’s pretend the glass has got all soft like gauze, so that wecan get through. Why, it’s turning into a sort of mist now, I declare!It’ll be easy enough to get through—” She was up on the chimney-piecewhile she said this, though she hardly knew how she had got there. Andcertainly the glass _was_ beginning to melt away, just like a brightsilvery mist.In another moment Alice was through the glass, and had jumped lightlydown into the Looking-glass room. The very first thing she did was tolook whether there was a fire in the fireplace, and she was quitepleased to find that there was a real one, blazing away as brightly asthe one she had left behind. “So I shall be as warm here as I was inthe old room,” thought Alice: “warmer, in fact, because there’ll be noone here to scold me away from the fire. Oh, what fun it’ll be, whenthey see me through the glass in here, and can’t get at me!”Then she began looking about, and noticed that what could be seen fromthe old room was quite common and uninteresting, but that all the restwas as different as possible. For instance, the pictures on the wallnext the fire seemed to be all alive, and the very clock on thechimney-piece (you know you can only see the back of it in theLooking-glass) had got the face of a little old man, and grinned ather.“They don’t keep this room so tidy as the other,” Alice thought toherself, as she noticed several of the chessmen down in the hearthamong the cinders: but in another moment, with a little “Oh!” ofsurprise, she was down on her hands and knees watching them. Thechessmen were walking about, two and two!“Here are the Red King and the Red Queen,” Alice said (in a whisper,for fear of frightening them), “and there are the White King and theWhite Queen sitting on the edge of the shovel—and here are two castleswalking arm in arm—I don’t think they can hear me,” she went on, as sheput her head closer down, “and I’m nearly sure they can’t see me. Ifeel somehow as if I were invisible—”Here something began squeaking on the table behind Alice, and made herturn her head just in time to see one of the White Pawns roll over andbegin kicking: she watched it with great curiosity to see what wouldhappen next.“It is the voice of my child!” the White Queen cried out as she rushedpast the King, so violently that she knocked him over among thecinders. “My precious Lily! My imperial kitten!” and she beganscrambling wildly up the side of the fender.“Imperial fiddlestick!” said the King, rubbing his nose, which had beenhurt by the fall. He had a right to be a _little_ annoyed with theQueen, for he was covered with ashes from head to foot.Alice was very anxious to be of use, and, as the poor little Lily wasnearly screaming herself into a fit, she hastily picked up the Queenand set her on the table by the side of her noisy little daughter.The Queen gasped, and sat down: the rapid journey through the air hadquite taken away her breath and for a minute or two she could donothing but hug the little Lily in silence. As soon as she hadrecovered her breath a little, she called out to the White King, whowas sitting sulkily among the ashes, “Mind the volcano!”“What volcano?” said the King, looking up anxiously into the fire, asif he thought that was the most likely place to find one.“Blew—me—up,” panted the Queen, who was still a little out of breath.“Mind you come up—the regular way—don’t get blown up!”Alice watched the White King as he slowly struggled up from bar to bar,till at last she said, “Why, you’ll be hours and hours getting to thetable, at that rate. I’d far better help you, hadn’t I?” But the Kingtook no notice of the question: it was quite clear that he couldneither hear her nor see her.So Alice picked him up very gently, and lifted him across more slowlythan she had lifted the Queen, that she mightn’t take his breath away:but, before she put him on the table, she thought she might as welldust him a little, he was so covered with ashes.She said afterwards that she had never seen in all her life such a faceas the King made, when he found himself held in the air by an invisiblehand, and being dusted: he was far too much astonished to cry out, buthis eyes and his mouth went on getting larger and larger, and rounderand rounder, till her hand shook so with laughing that she nearly lethim drop upon the floor.“Oh! _please_ don’t make such faces, my dear!” she cried out, quiteforgetting that the King couldn’t hear her. “You make me laugh so thatI can hardly hold you! And don’t keep your mouth so wide open! All theashes will get into it—there, now I think you’re tidy enough!” sheadded, as she smoothed his hair, and set him upon the table near theQueen.The King immediately fell flat on his back, and lay perfectly still:and Alice was a little alarmed at what she had done, and went round theroom to see if she could find any water to throw over him. However, shecould find nothing but a bottle of ink, and when she got back with itshe found he had recovered, and he and the Queen were talking togetherin a frightened whisper—so low, that Alice could hardly hear what theysaid.The King was saying, “I assure, you my dear, I turned cold to the veryends of my whiskers!”To which the Queen replied, “You haven’t got any whiskers.”“The horror of that moment,” the King went on, “I shall never, _never_forget!”“You will, though,” the Queen said, “if you don’t make a memorandum ofit.”Alice looked on with great interest as the King took an enormousmemorandum-book out of his pocket, and began writing. A sudden thoughtstruck her, and she took hold of the end of the pencil, which came someway over his shoulder, and began writing for him.The poor King looked puzzled and unhappy, and struggled with the pencilfor some time without saying anything; but Alice was too strong forhim, and at last he panted out, “My dear! I really _must_ get a thinnerpencil. I can’t manage this one a bit; it writes all manner of thingsthat I don’t intend—”“What manner of things?” said the Queen, looking over the book (inwhich Alice had put “_The White Knight is sliding down the poker. Hebalances very badly_”) “That’s not a memorandum of _your_ feelings!”There was a book lying near Alice on the table, and while she satwatching the White King (for she was still a little anxious about him,and had the ink all ready to throw over him, in case he fainted again),she turned over the leaves, to find some part that she could read,“—for it’s all in some language I don’t know,” she said to herself.It was like this..YKCOWREBBAJsevot yhtils eht dna, gillirb sawT’ebaw eht ni elbmig dna eryg diD,sevogorob eht erew ysmim llA.ebargtuo shtar emom eht dnAShe puzzled over this for some time, but at last a bright thoughtstruck her. “Why, it’s a Looking-glass book, of course! And if I holdit up to a glass, the words will all go the right way again.”This was the poem that Alice read.JABBERWOCKY.’Twas brillig, and the slithy tovesDid gyre and gimble in the wabe;All mimsy were the borogoves,And the mome raths outgrabe.“Beware the Jabberwock, my son!The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!Beware the Jubjub bird, and shunThe frumious Bandersnatch!”He took his vorpal sword in hand:Long time the manxome foe he sought—So rested he by the Tumtum tree,And stood awhile in thought.And as in uffish thought he stood,The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,And burbled as it came!One, two! One, two! And through and throughThe vorpal blade went snicker-snack!He left it dead, and with its headHe went galumphing back.“And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?Come to my arms, my beamish boy!O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!”He chortled in his joy.’Twas brillig, and the slithy tovesDid gyre and gimble in the wabe;All mimsy were the borogoves,And the mome raths outgrabe.“It seems very pretty,” she said when she had finished it, “but it’s_rather_ hard to understand!” (You see she didn’t like to confess, evento herself, that she couldn’t make it out at all.) “Somehow it seems tofill my head with ideas—only I don’t exactly know what they are!However, _somebody_ killed _something_: that’s clear, at any rate—”“But oh!” thought Alice, suddenly jumping up, “if I don’t make haste Ishall have to go back through the Looking-glass, before I’ve seen whatthe rest of the house is like! Let’s have a look at the garden first!”She was out of the room in a moment, and ran down stairs—or, at least,it wasn’t exactly running, but a new invention of hers for getting downstairs quickly and easily, as Alice said to herself. She just kept thetips of her fingers on the hand-rail, and floated gently down withouteven touching the stairs with her feet; then she floated on through thehall, and would have gone straight out at the door in the same way, ifshe hadn’t caught hold of the door-post. She was getting a little giddywith so much floating in the air, and was rather glad to find herselfwalking again in the natural way.CHAPTER II.The Garden of Live Flowers“I should see the garden far better,” said Alice to herself, “if Icould get to the top of that hill: and here’s a path that leadsstraight to it—at least, no, it doesn’t do that—” (after going a fewyards along the path, and turning several sharp corners), “but Isuppose it will at last. But how curiously it twists! It’s more like acorkscrew than a path! Well, _this_ turn goes to the hill, Isuppose—no, it doesn’t! This goes straight back to the house! Wellthen, I’ll try it the other way.”And so she did: wandering up and down, and trying turn after turn, butalways coming back to the house, do what she would. Indeed, once, whenshe turned a corner rather more quickly than usual, she ran against itbefore she could stop herself.“It’s no use talking about it,” Alice said, looking up at the house andpretending it was arguing with her. “I’m _not_ going in again yet. Iknow I should have to get through the Looking-glass again—back into theold room—and there’d be an end of all my adventures!”So, resolutely turning her back upon the house, she set out once moredown the path, determined to keep straight on till she got to the hill.For a few minutes all went on well, and she was just saying, “I really_shall_ do it this time—” when the path gave a sudden twist and shookitself (as she described it afterwards), and the next moment she foundherself actually walking in at the door.“Oh, it’s too bad!” she cried. “I never saw such a house for getting inthe way! Never!”However, there was the hill full in sight, so there was nothing to bedone but start again. This time she came upon a large flower-bed, witha border of daisies, and a willow-tree growing in the middle.“O Tiger-lily,” said Alice, addressing herself to one that was wavinggracefully about in the wind, “I _wish_ you could talk!”“We _can_ talk,” said the Tiger-lily: “when there’s anybody worthtalking to.”Alice was so astonished that she could not speak for a minute: it quiteseemed to take her breath away. At length, as the Tiger-lily only wenton waving about, she spoke again, in a timid voice—almost in a whisper.“And can _all_ the flowers talk?”“As well as _you_ can,” said the Tiger-lily. “And a great deal louder.”“It isn’t manners for us to begin, you know,” said the Rose, “and Ireally was wondering when you’d speak! Said I to myself, ‘Her face hasgot _some_ sense in it, though it’s not a clever one!’ Still, you’rethe right colour, and that goes a long way.”“I don’t care about the colour,” the Tiger-lily remarked. “If only herpetals curled up a little more, she’d be all right.”Alice didn’t like being criticised, so she began asking questions.“Aren’t you sometimes frightened at being planted out here, with nobodyto take care of you?”“There’s the tree in the middle,” said the Rose: “what else is it goodfor?”“But what could it do, if any danger came?” Alice asked.“It says ‘Bough-wough!’” cried a Daisy: “that’s why its branches arecalled boughs!”“Didn’t you know _that_?” cried another Daisy, and here they all beganshouting together, till the air seemed quite full of little shrillvoices. “Silence, every one of you!” cried the Tiger-lily, wavingitself passionately from side to side, and trembling with excitement.“They know I can’t get at them!” it panted, bending its quivering headtowards Alice, “or they wouldn’t dare to do it!”“Never mind!” Alice said in a soothing tone, and stooping down to thedaisies, who were just beginning again, she whispered, “If you don’thold your tongues, I’ll pick you!”There was silence in a moment, and several of the pink daisies turnedwhite.“That’s right!” said the Tiger-lily. “The daisies are worst of all.When one speaks, they all begin together, and it’s enough to make onewither to hear the way they go on!”“How is it you can all talk so nicely?” Alice said, hoping to get itinto a better temper by a compliment. “I’ve been in many gardensbefore, but none of the flowers could talk.”“Put your hand down, and feel the ground,” said the Tiger-lily. “Thenyou’ll know why.”Alice did so. “It’s very hard,” she said, “but I don’t see what thathas to do with it.”“In most gardens,” the Tiger-lily said, “they make the beds too soft—sothat the flowers are always asleep.”This sounded a very good reason, and Alice was quite pleased to knowit. “I never thought of that before!” she said.“It’s _my_ opinion that you never think _at all_,” the Rose said in arather severe tone.“I never saw anybody that looked stupider,” a Violet said, so suddenly,that Alice quite jumped; for it hadn’t spoken before.“Hold _your_ tongue!” cried the Tiger-lily. “As if _you_ ever sawanybody! You keep your head under the leaves, and snore away there,till you know no more what’s going on in the world, than if you were abud!”“Are there any more people in the garden besides me?” Alice said, notchoosing to notice the Rose’s last remark.“There’s one other flower in the garden that can move about like you,”said the Rose. “I wonder how you do it—” (“You’re always wondering,”said the Tiger-lily), “but she’s more bushy than you are.”“Is she like me?” Alice asked eagerly, for the thought crossed hermind, “There’s another little girl in the garden, somewhere!”“Well, she has the same awkward shape as you,” the Rose said, “butshe’s redder—and her petals are shorter, I think.”“Her petals are done up close, almost like a dahlia,” the Tiger-lilyinterrupted: “not tumbled about anyhow, like yours.”“But that’s not _your_ fault,” the Rose added kindly: “you’re beginningto fade, you know—and then one can’t help one’s petals getting a littleuntidy.”Alice didn’t like this idea at all: so, to change the subject, sheasked “Does she ever come out here?”“I daresay you’ll see her soon,” said the Rose. “She’s one of thethorny kind.”“Where does she wear the thorns?” Alice asked with some curiosity.“Why all round her head, of course,” the Rose replied. “I was wondering_you_ hadn’t got some too. I thought it was the regular rule.”“She’s coming!” cried the Larkspur. “I hear her footstep, thump, thump,thump, along the gravel-walk!”Alice looked round eagerly, and found that it was the Red Queen. “She’sgrown a good deal!” was her first remark. She had indeed: when Alicefirst found her in the ashes, she had been only three inches high—andhere she was, half a head taller than Alice herself!“It’s the fresh air that does it,” said the Rose: “wonderfully fine airit is, out here.”“I think I’ll go and meet her,” said Alice, for, though the flowerswere interesting enough, she felt that it would be far grander to havea talk with a real Queen.“You can’t possibly do that,” said the Rose: “_I_ should advise you towalk the other way.”This sounded nonsense to Alice, so she said nothing, but set off atonce towards the Red Queen. To her surprise, she lost sight of her in amoment, and found herself walking in at the front-door again.A little provoked, she drew back, and after looking everywhere for thequeen (whom she spied out at last, a long way off), she thought shewould try the plan, this time, of walking in the opposite direction.It succeeded beautifully. She had not been walking a minute before shefound herself face to face with the Red Queen, and full in sight of thehill she had been so long aiming at.“Where do you come from?” said the Red Queen. “And where are you going?Look up, speak nicely, and don’t twiddle your fingers all the time.”Alice attended to all these directions, and explained, as well as shecould, that she had lost her way.“I don’t know what you mean by _your_ way,” said the Queen: “all theways about here belong to _me_—but why did you come out here at all?”she added in a kinder tone. “Curtsey while you’re thinking what to say,it saves time.”Alice wondered a little at this, but she was too much in awe of theQueen to disbelieve it. “I’ll try it when I go home,” she thought toherself, “the next time I’m a little late for dinner.”“It’s time for you to answer now,” the Queen said, looking at herwatch: “open your mouth a _little_ wider when you speak, and always say‘your Majesty.’”“I only wanted to see what the garden was like, your Majesty—”“That’s right,” said the Queen, patting her on the head, which Alicedidn’t like at all, “though, when you say ‘garden,’—_I’ve_ seengardens, compared with which this would be a wilderness.”Alice didn’t dare to argue the point, but went on: “—and I thought I’dtry and find my way to the top of that hill—”“When you say ‘hill,’” the Queen interrupted, “_I_ could show youhills, in comparison with which you’d call that a valley.”“No, I shouldn’t,” said Alice, surprised into contradicting her atlast: “a hill _can’t_ be a valley, you know. That would be nonsense—”The Red Queen shook her head, “You may call it ‘nonsense’ if you like,”she said, “but _I’ve_ heard nonsense, compared with which that would beas sensible as a dictionary!”Alice curtseyed again, as she was afraid from the Queen’s tone that shewas a _little_ offended: and they walked on in silence till they got tothe top of the little hill.For some minutes Alice stood without speaking, looking out in alldirections over the country—and a most curious country it was. Therewere a number of tiny little brooks running straight across it fromside to side, and the ground between was divided up into squares by anumber of little green hedges, that reached from brook to brook.“I declare it’s marked out just like a large chessboard!” Alice said atlast. “There ought to be some men moving about somewhere—and so thereare!” She added in a tone of delight, and her heart began to beat quickwith excitement as she went on. “It’s a great huge game of chess that’sbeing played—all over the world—if this _is_ the world at all, youknow. Oh, what fun it is! How I _wish_ I was one of them! I wouldn’tmind being a Pawn, if only I might join—though of course I should_like_ to be a Queen, best.”She glanced rather shyly at the real Queen as she said this, but hercompanion only smiled pleasantly, and said, “That’s easily managed. Youcan be the White Queen’s Pawn, if you like, as Lily’s too young toplay; and you’re in the Second Square to begin with: when you get tothe Eighth Square you’ll be a Queen—” Just at this moment, somehow orother, they began to run.Alice never could quite make out, in thinking it over afterwards, howit was that they began: all she remembers is, that they were runninghand in hand, and the Queen went so fast that it was all she could doto keep up with her: and still the Queen kept crying “Faster! Faster!”but Alice felt she _could not_ go faster, though she had not breathleft to say so.The most curious part of the thing was, that the trees and the otherthings round them never changed their places at all: however fast theywent, they never seemed to pass anything. “I wonder if all the thingsmove along with us?” thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen seemedto guess her thoughts, for she cried, “Faster! Don’t try to talk!”Not that Alice had any idea of doing _that_. She felt as if she wouldnever be able to talk again, she was getting so much out of breath: andstill the Queen cried “Faster! Faster!” and dragged her along. “Are wenearly there?” Alice managed to pant out at last.“Nearly there!” the Queen repeated. “Why, we passed it ten minutes ago!Faster!” And they ran on for a time in silence, with the wind whistlingin Alice’s ears, and almost blowing her hair off her head, she fancied.“Now! Now!” cried the Queen. “Faster! Faster!” And they went so fastthat at last they seemed to skim through the air, hardly touching theground with their feet, till suddenly, just as Alice was getting quiteexhausted, they stopped, and she found herself sitting on the ground,breathless and giddy.The Queen propped her up against a tree, and said kindly, “You may resta little now.”Alice looked round her in great surprise. “Why, I do believe we’ve beenunder this tree the whole time! Everything’s just as it was!”“Of course it is,” said the Queen, “what would you have it?”“Well, in _our_ country,” said Alice, still panting a little, “you’dgenerally get to somewhere else—if you ran very fast for a long time,as we’ve been doing.”“A slow sort of country!” said the Queen. “Now, _here_, you see, ittakes all the running _you_ can do, to keep in the same place. If youwant to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast asthat!”“I’d rather not try, please!” said Alice. “I’m quite content to stayhere—only I _am_ so hot and thirsty!”“I know what _you’d_ like!” the Queen said good-naturedly, taking alittle box out of her pocket. “Have a biscuit?”Alice thought it would not be civil to say “No,” though it wasn’t atall what she wanted. So she took it, and ate it as well as she could:and it was _very_ dry; and she thought she had never been so nearlychoked in all her life.“While you’re refreshing yourself,” said the Queen, “I’ll just take themeasurements.” And she took a ribbon out of her pocket, marked ininches, and began measuring the ground, and sticking little pegs inhere and there.“At the end of two yards,” she said, putting in a peg to mark thedistance, “I shall give you your directions—have another biscuit?”“No, thank you,” said Alice: “one’s _quite_ enough!”“Thirst quenched, I hope?” said the Queen.Alice did not know what to say to this, but luckily the Queen did notwait for an answer, but went on. “At the end of _three_ yards I shallrepeat them—for fear of your forgetting them. At the end of _four_, Ishall say good-bye. And at the end of _five_, I shall go!”She had got all the pegs put in by this time, and Alice looked on withgreat interest as she returned to the tree, and then began slowlywalking down the row.At the two-yard peg she faced round, and said, “A pawn goes two squaresin its first move, you know. So you’ll go _very_ quickly through theThird Square—by railway, I should think—and you’ll find yourself in theFourth Square in no time. Well, _that_ square belongs to Tweedledum andTweedledee—the Fifth is mostly water—the Sixth belongs to HumptyDumpty—But you make no remark?”“I—I didn’t know I had to make one—just then,” Alice faltered out.“You _should_ have said, ‘It’s extremely kind of you to tell me allthis’—however, we’ll suppose it said—the Seventh Square is allforest—however, one of the Knights will show you the way—and in theEighth Square we shall be Queens together, and it’s all feasting andfun!” Alice got up and curtseyed, and sat down again.At the next peg the Queen turned again, and this time she said, “Speakin French when you can’t think of the English for a thing—turn out yourtoes as you walk—and remember who you are!” She did not wait for Aliceto curtsey this time, but walked on quickly to the next peg, where sheturned for a moment to say “good-bye,” and then hurried on to the last.How it happened, Alice never knew, but exactly as she came to the lastpeg, she was gone. Whether she vanished into the air, or whether sheran quickly into the wood (“and she _can_ run very fast!” thoughtAlice), there was no way of guessing, but she was gone, and Alice beganto remember that she was a Pawn, and that it would soon be time for herto move.CHAPTER III.Looking-Glass InsectsOf course the first thing to do was to make a grand survey of thecountry she was going to travel through. “It’s something very likelearning geography,” thought Alice, as she stood on tiptoe in hopes ofbeing able to see a little further. “Principal rivers—there _are_ none.Principal mountains—I’m on the only one, but I don’t think it’s got anyname. Principal towns—why, what _are_ those creatures, making honeydown there? They can’t be bees—nobody ever saw bees a mile off, youknow—” and for some time she stood silent, watching one of them thatwas bustling about among the flowers, poking its proboscis into them,“just as if it was a regular bee,” thought Alice.However, this was anything but a regular bee: in fact it was anelephant—as Alice soon found out, though the idea quite took her breathaway at first. “And what enormous flowers they must be!” was her nextidea. “Something like cottages with the roofs taken off, and stalks putto them—and what quantities of honey they must make! I think I’ll godown and—no, I won’t _just_ yet,” she went on, checking herself just asshe was beginning to run down the hill, and trying to find some excusefor turning shy so suddenly. “It’ll never do to go down among themwithout a good long branch to brush them away—and what fun it’ll bewhen they ask me how I like my walk. I shall say—‘Oh, I like it wellenough—’” (here came the favourite little toss of the head), “‘only itwas so dusty and hot, and the elephants did tease so!’”“I think I’ll go down the other way,” she said after a pause: “andperhaps I may visit the elephants later on. Besides, I do so want toget into the Third Square!”So with this excuse she ran down the hill and jumped over the first ofthe six little brooks.*      *      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      *      *“Tickets, please!” said the Guard, putting his head in at the window.In a moment everybody was holding out a ticket: they were about thesame size as the people, and quite seemed to fill the carriage.“Now then! Show your ticket, child!” the Guard went on, looking angrilyat Alice. And a great many voices all said together (“like the chorusof a song,” thought Alice), “Don’t keep him waiting, child! Why, histime is worth a thousand pounds a minute!”“I’m afraid I haven’t got one,” Alice said in a frightened tone: “therewasn’t a ticket-office where I came from.” And again the chorus ofvoices went on. “There wasn’t room for one where she came from. Theland there is worth a thousand pounds an inch!”“Don’t make excuses,” said the Guard: “you should have bought one fromthe engine-driver.” And once more the chorus of voices went on with“The man that drives the engine. Why, the smoke alone is worth athousand pounds a puff!”Alice thought to herself, “Then there’s no use in speaking.” The voicesdidn’t join in this time, as she hadn’t spoken, but to her greatsurprise, they all _thought_ in chorus (I hope you understand what_thinking in chorus_ means—for I must confess that _I_ don’t), “Bettersay nothing at all. Language is worth a thousand pounds a word!”“I shall dream about a thousand pounds tonight, I know I shall!”thought Alice.All this time the Guard was looking at her, first through a telescope,then through a microscope, and then through an opera-glass. At last hesaid, “You’re travelling the wrong way,” and shut up the window andwent away.“So young a child,” said the gentleman sitting opposite to her (he wasdressed in white paper), “ought to know which way she’s going, even ifshe doesn’t know her own name!”A Goat, that was sitting next to the gentleman in white, shut his eyesand said in a loud voice, “She ought to know her way to theticket-office, even if she doesn’t know her alphabet!”There was a Beetle sitting next to the Goat (it was a very queercarriage-full of passengers altogether), and, as the rule seemed to bethat they should all speak in turn, _he_ went on with “She’ll have togo back from here as luggage!”Alice couldn’t see who was sitting beyond the Beetle, but a hoarsevoice spoke next. “Change engines—” it said, and was obliged to leaveoff.“It sounds like a horse,” Alice thought to herself. And an extremelysmall voice, close to her ear, said, “You might make a joke onthat—something about ‘horse’ and ‘hoarse,’ you know.”Then a very gentle voice in the distance said, “She must be labelled‘Lass, with care,’ you know—”And after that other voices went on (“What a number of people there arein the carriage!” thought Alice), saying, “She must go by post, asshe’s got a head on her—” “She must be sent as a message by thetelegraph—” “She must draw the train herself the rest of the way—” andso on.But the gentleman dressed in white paper leaned forwards and whisperedin her ear, “Never mind what they all say, my dear, but take areturn-ticket every time the train stops.”“Indeed I shan’t!” Alice said rather impatiently. “I don’t belong tothis railway journey at all—I was in a wood just now—and I wish I couldget back there.”“You might make a joke on _that_,” said the little voice close to herear: “something about ‘you _would_ if you could,’ you know.”“Don’t tease so,” said Alice, looking about in vain to see where thevoice came from; “if you’re so anxious to have a joke made, why don’tyou make one yourself?”The little voice sighed deeply: it was _very_ unhappy, evidently, andAlice would have said something pitying to comfort it, “If it wouldonly sigh like other people!” she thought. But this was such awonderfully small sigh, that she wouldn’t have heard it at all, if ithadn’t come _quite_ close to her ear. The consequence of this was thatit tickled her ear very much, and quite took off her thoughts from theunhappiness of the poor little creature.“I know you are a friend,” the little voice went on; “a dear friend,and an old friend. And you won’t hurt me, though I _am_ an insect.”“What kind of insect?” Alice inquired a little anxiously. What shereally wanted to know was, whether it could sting or not, but shethought this wouldn’t be quite a civil question to ask.“What, then you don’t—” the little voice began, when it was drowned bya shrill scream from the engine, and everybody jumped up in alarm,Alice among the rest.The Horse, who had put his head out of the window, quietly drew it inand said, “It’s only a brook we have to jump over.” Everybody seemedsatisfied with this, though Alice felt a little nervous at the idea oftrains jumping at all. “However, it’ll take us into the Fourth Square,that’s some comfort!” she said to herself. In another moment she feltthe carriage rise straight up into the air, and in her fright shecaught at the thing nearest to her hand, which happened to be theGoat’s beard.*      *      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      *      *But the beard seemed to melt away as she touched it, and she foundherself sitting quietly under a tree—while the Gnat (for that was theinsect she had been talking to) was balancing itself on a twig justover her head, and fanning her with its wings.It certainly was a _very_ large Gnat: “about the size of a chicken,”Alice thought. Still, she couldn’t feel nervous with it, after they hadbeen talking together so long.“—then you don’t like all insects?” the Gnat went on, as quietly as ifnothing had happened.“I like them when they can talk,” Alice said. “None of them ever talk,where _I_ come from.”“What sort of insects do you rejoice in, where _you_ come from?” theGnat inquired.“I don’t _rejoice_ in insects at all,” Alice explained, “because I’mrather afraid of them—at least the large kinds. But I can tell you thenames of some of them.”“Of course they answer to their names?” the Gnat remarked carelessly.“I never knew them to do it.”“What’s the use of their having names,” the Gnat said, “if they won’tanswer to them?”“No use to _them_,” said Alice; “but it’s useful to the people who namethem, I suppose. If not, why do things have names at all?”“I can’t say,” the Gnat replied. “Further on, in the wood down there,they’ve got no names—however, go on with your list of insects: you’rewasting time.”“Well, there’s the Horse-fly,” Alice began, counting off the names onher fingers.“All right,” said the Gnat: “half way up that bush, you’ll see aRocking-horse-fly, if you look. It’s made entirely of wood, and getsabout by swinging itself from branch to branch.”“What does it live on?” Alice asked, with great curiosity.“Sap and sawdust,” said the Gnat. “Go on with the list.”Alice looked up at the Rocking-horse-fly with great interest, and madeup her mind that it must have been just repainted, it looked so brightand sticky; and then she went on.“And there’s the Dragon-fly.”“Look on the branch above your head,” said the Gnat, “and there you’llfind a snap-dragon-fly. Its body is made of plum-pudding, its wings ofholly-leaves, and its head is a raisin burning in brandy.”“And what does it live on?”“Frumenty and mince pie,” the Gnat replied; “and it makes its nest in aChristmas box.”“And then there’s the Butterfly,” Alice went on, after she had taken agood look at the insect with its head on fire, and had thought toherself, “I wonder if that’s the reason insects are so fond of flyinginto candles—because they want to turn into Snap-dragon-flies!”“Crawling at your feet,” said the Gnat (Alice drew her feet back insome alarm), “you may observe a Bread-and-Butterfly. Its wings are thinslices of Bread-and-butter, its body is a crust, and its head is a lumpof sugar.”“And what does _it_ live on?”“Weak tea with cream in it.”A new difficulty came into Alice’s head. “Supposing it couldn’t findany?” she suggested.“Then it would die, of course.”“But that must happen very often,” Alice remarked thoughtfully.“It always happens,” said the Gnat.After this, Alice was silent for a minute or two, pondering. The Gnatamused itself meanwhile by humming round and round her head: at last itsettled again and remarked, “I suppose you don’t want to lose yourname?”“No, indeed,” Alice said, a little anxiously.“And yet I don’t know,” the Gnat went on in a careless tone: “onlythink how convenient it would be if you could manage to go home withoutit! For instance, if the governess wanted to call you to your lessons,she would call out ‘come here—,’ and there she would have to leave off,because there wouldn’t be any name for her to call, and of course youwouldn’t have to go, you know.”“That would never do, I’m sure,” said Alice: “the governess would neverthink of excusing me lessons for that. If she couldn’t remember myname, she’d call me ‘Miss!’ as the servants do.”“Well, if she said ‘Miss,’ and didn’t say anything more,” the Gnatremarked, “of course you’d miss your lessons. That’s a joke. I wish_you_ had made it.”“Why do you wish _I_ had made it?” Alice asked. “It’s a very bad one.”But the Gnat only sighed deeply, while two large tears came rollingdown its cheeks.“You shouldn’t make jokes,” Alice said, “if it makes you so unhappy.”Then came another of those melancholy little sighs, and this time thepoor Gnat really seemed to have sighed itself away, for, when Alicelooked up, there was nothing whatever to be seen on the twig, and, asshe was getting quite chilly with sitting still so long, she got up andwalked on.She very soon came to an open field, with a wood on the other side ofit: it looked much darker than the last wood, and Alice felt a _little_timid about going into it. However, on second thoughts, she made up hermind to go on: “for I certainly won’t go _back_,” she thought toherself, and this was the only way to the Eighth Square.“This must be the wood,” she said thoughtfully to herself, “wherethings have no names. I wonder what’ll become of _my_ name when I goin? I shouldn’t like to lose it at all—because they’d have to give meanother, and it would be almost certain to be an ugly one. But then thefun would be trying to find the creature that had got my old name!That’s just like the advertisements, you know, when people losedogs—‘_answers to the name of “Dash:” had on a brass collar_’—justfancy calling everything you met ‘Alice,’ till one of them answered!Only they wouldn’t answer at all, if they were wise.”She was rambling on in this way when she reached the wood: it lookedvery cool and shady. “Well, at any rate it’s a great comfort,” she saidas she stepped under the trees, “after being so hot, to get intothe—into _what_?” she went on, rather surprised at not being able tothink of the word. “I mean to get under the—under the—under _this_, youknow!” putting her hand on the trunk of the tree. “What _does_ it callitself, I wonder? I do believe it’s got no name—why, to be sure ithasn’t!”She stood silent for a minute, thinking: then she suddenly began again.“Then it really _has_ happened, after all! And now, who am I? I _will_remember, if I can! I’m determined to do it!” But being determineddidn’t help much, and all she could say, after a great deal ofpuzzling, was, “L, I _know_ it begins with L!”Just then a Fawn came wandering by: it looked at Alice with its largegentle eyes, but didn’t seem at all frightened. “Here then! Here then!”Alice said, as she held out her hand and tried to stroke it; but itonly started back a little, and then stood looking at her again.“What do you call yourself?” the Fawn said at last. Such a soft sweetvoice it had!“I wish I knew!” thought poor Alice. She answered, rather sadly,“Nothing, just now.”“Think again,” it said: “that won’t do.”Alice thought, but nothing came of it. “Please, would you tell me what_you_ call yourself?” she said timidly. “I think that might help alittle.”“I’ll tell you, if you’ll move a little further on,” the Fawn said. “Ican’t remember here.”So they walked on together though the wood, Alice with her arms claspedlovingly round the soft neck of the Fawn, till they came out intoanother open field, and here the Fawn gave a sudden bound into the air,and shook itself free from Alice’s arms. “I’m a Fawn!” it cried out ina voice of delight, “and, dear me! you’re a human child!” A sudden lookof alarm came into its beautiful brown eyes, and in another moment ithad darted away at full speed.Alice stood looking after it, almost ready to cry with vexation athaving lost her dear little fellow-traveller so suddenly. “However, Iknow my name now.” she said, “that’s _some_ comfort. Alice—Alice—Iwon’t forget it again. And now, which of these finger-posts ought I tofollow, I wonder?”It was not a very difficult question to answer, as there was only oneroad through the wood, and the two finger-posts both pointed along it.“I’ll settle it,” Alice said to herself, “when the road divides andthey point different ways.”But this did not seem likely to happen. She went on and on, a long way,but wherever the road divided there were sure to be two finger-postspointing the same way, one marked “TO TWEEDLEDUM’S HOUSE” and the other“TO THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE.”“I do believe,” said Alice at last, “that they live in the same house!I wonder I never thought of that before—But I can’t stay there long.I’ll just call and say ‘how d’you do?’ and ask them the way out of thewood. If I could only get to the Eighth Square before it gets dark!” Soshe wandered on, talking to herself as she went, till, on turning asharp corner, she came upon two fat little men, so suddenly that shecould not help starting back, but in another moment she recoveredherself, feeling sure that they must be.CHAPTER IV.Tweedledum And TweedledeeThey were standing under a tree, each with an arm round the other’sneck, and Alice knew which was which in a moment, because one of themhad “DUM” embroidered on his collar, and the other “DEE.” “I supposethey’ve each got ‘TWEEDLE’ round at the back of the collar,” she saidto herself.They stood so still that she quite forgot they were alive, and she wasjust looking round to see if the word ‘TWEEDLE’ was written at the backof each collar, when she was startled by a voice coming from the onemarked “DUM.”“If you think we’re wax-works,” he said, “you ought to pay, you know.Wax-works weren’t made to be looked at for nothing, nohow!”“Contrariwise,” added the one marked “DEE,” “if you think we’re alive,you ought to speak.”“I’m sure I’m very sorry,” was all Alice could say; for the words ofthe old song kept ringing through her head like the ticking of a clock,and she could hardly help saying them out loud:—“Tweedledum and TweedledeeAgreed to have a battle;For Tweedledum said TweedledeeHad spoiled his nice new rattle.Just then flew down a monstrous crow,As black as a tar-barrel;Which frightened both the heroes so,They quite forgot their quarrel.”“I know what you’re thinking about,” said Tweedledum: “but it isn’t so,nohow.”“Contrariwise,” continued Tweedledee, “if it was so, it might be; andif it were so, it would be; but as it isn’t, it ain’t. That’s logic.”“I was thinking,” Alice said very politely, “which is the best way outof this wood: it’s getting so dark. Would you tell me, please?”But the little men only looked at each other and grinned.They looked so exactly like a couple of great schoolboys, that Alicecouldn’t help pointing her finger at Tweedledum, and saying “FirstBoy!”“Nohow!” Tweedledum cried out briskly, and shut his mouth up again witha snap.“Next Boy!” said Alice, passing on to Tweedledee, though she felt quitecertain he would only shout out “Contrariwise!” and so he did.“You’ve been wrong!” cried Tweedledum. “The first thing in a visit isto say ‘How d’ye do?’ and shake hands!” And here the two brothers gaveeach other a hug, and then they held out the two hands that were free,to shake hands with her.Alice did not like shaking hands with either of them first, for fear ofhurting the other one’s feelings; so, as the best way out of thedifficulty, she took hold of both hands at once: the next moment theywere dancing round in a ring. This seemed quite natural (she rememberedafterwards), and she was not even surprised to hear music playing: itseemed to come from the tree under which they were dancing, and it wasdone (as well as she could make it out) by the branches rubbing oneacross the other, like fiddles and fiddle-sticks.“But it certainly _was_ funny,” (Alice said afterwards, when she wastelling her sister the history of all this,) “to find myself singing‘_Here we go round the mulberry bush_.’ I don’t know when I began it,but somehow I felt as if I’d been singing it a long long time!”The other two dancers were fat, and very soon out of breath. “Fourtimes round is enough for one dance,” Tweedledum panted out, and theyleft off dancing as suddenly as they had begun: the music stopped atthe same moment.Then they let go of Alice’s hands, and stood looking at her for aminute: there was a rather awkward pause, as Alice didn’t know how tobegin a conversation with people she had just been dancing with. “Itwould never do to say ‘How d’ye do?’ _now_,” she said to herself: “weseem to have got beyond that, somehow!”“I hope you’re not much tired?” she said at last.“Nohow. And thank you _very_ much for asking,” said Tweedledum.“So _much_ obliged!” added Tweedledee. “You like poetry?”“Ye-es, pretty well—_some_ poetry,” Alice said doubtfully. “Would youtell me which road leads out of the wood?”“What shall I repeat to her?” said Tweedledee, looking round atTweedledum with great solemn eyes, and not noticing Alice’s question.“‘_The Walrus and the Carpenter_’ is the longest,” Tweedledum replied,giving his brother an affectionate hug.Tweedledee began instantly:“The sun was shining—”Here Alice ventured to interrupt him. “If it’s _very_ long,” she said,as politely as she could, “would you please tell me first which road—”Tweedledee smiled gently, and began again:“The sun was shining on the sea,Shining with all his might:He did his very best to makeThe billows smooth and bright—And this was odd, because it wasThe middle of the night.The moon was shining sulkily,Because she thought the sunHad got no business to be thereAfter the day was done—‘It’s very rude of him,’ she said,‘To come and spoil the fun!’The sea was wet as wet could be,The sands were dry as dry.You could not see a cloud, becauseNo cloud was in the sky:No birds were flying over head—There were no birds to fly.The Walrus and the CarpenterWere walking close at hand;They wept like anything to seeSuch quantities of sand:‘If this were only cleared away,’They said, ‘it _would_ be grand!’‘If seven maids with seven mopsSwept it for half a year,Do you suppose,’ the Walrus said,‘That they could get it clear?’‘I doubt it,’ said the Carpenter,And shed a bitter tear.‘O Oysters, come and walk with us!’The Walrus did beseech.‘A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,Along the briny beach:We cannot do with more than four,To give a hand to each.’The eldest Oyster looked at him.But never a word he said:The eldest Oyster winked his eye,And shook his heavy head—Meaning to say he did not chooseTo leave the oyster-bed.But four young oysters hurried up,All eager for the treat:Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,Their shoes were clean and neat—And this was odd, because, you know,They hadn’t any feet.Four other Oysters followed them,And yet another four;And thick and fast they came at last,And more, and more, and more—All hopping through the frothy waves,And scrambling to the shore.The Walrus and the CarpenterWalked on a mile or so,And then they rested on a rockConveniently low:And all the little Oysters stoodAnd waited in a row.‘The time has come,’ the Walrus said,‘To talk of many things:Of shoes—and ships—and sealing-wax—Of cabbages—and kings—And why the sea is boiling hot—And whether pigs have wings.’‘But wait a bit,’ the Oysters cried,‘Before we have our chat;For some of us are out of breath,And all of us are fat!’‘No hurry!’ said the Carpenter.They thanked him much for that.‘A loaf of bread,’ the Walrus said,‘Is what we chiefly need:Pepper and vinegar besidesAre very good indeed—Now if you’re ready Oysters dear,We can begin to feed.’‘But not on us!’ the Oysters cried,Turning a little blue,‘After such kindness, that would beA dismal thing to do!’‘The night is fine,’ the Walrus said‘Do you admire the view?‘It was so kind of you to come!And you are very nice!’The Carpenter said nothing but‘Cut us another slice:I wish you were not quite so deaf—I’ve had to ask you twice!’‘It seems a shame,’ the Walrus said,‘To play them such a trick,After we’ve brought them out so far,And made them trot so quick!’The Carpenter said nothing but‘The butter’s spread too thick!’‘I weep for you,’ the Walrus said.‘I deeply sympathize.’With sobs and tears he sorted outThose of the largest size.Holding his pocket handkerchiefBefore his streaming eyes.‘O Oysters,’ said the Carpenter.‘You’ve had a pleasant run!Shall we be trotting home again?’But answer came there none—And that was scarcely odd, becauseThey’d eaten every one.”“I like the Walrus best,” said Alice: “because you see he was a_little_ sorry for the poor oysters.”“He ate more than the Carpenter, though,” said Tweedledee. “You see heheld his handkerchief in front, so that the Carpenter couldn’t counthow many he took: contrariwise.”“That was mean!” Alice said indignantly. “Then I like the Carpenterbest—if he didn’t eat so many as the Walrus.”“But he ate as many as he could get,” said Tweedledum.This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice began, “Well! They were _both_very unpleasant characters—” Here she checked herself in some alarm, athearing something that sounded to her like the puffing of a largesteam-engine in the wood near them, though she feared it was morelikely to be a wild beast. “Are there any lions or tigers about here?”she asked timidly.“It’s only the Red King snoring,” said Tweedledee.“Come and look at him!” the brothers cried, and they each took one ofAlice’s hands, and led her up to where the King was sleeping.“Isn’t he a _lovely_ sight?” said Tweedledum.Alice couldn’t say honestly that he was. He had a tall red night-capon, with a tassel, and he was lying crumpled up into a sort of untidyheap, and snoring loud—“fit to snore his head off!” as Tweedledumremarked.“I’m afraid he’ll catch cold with lying on the damp grass,” said Alice,who was a very thoughtful little girl.“He’s dreaming now,” said Tweedledee: “and what do you think he’sdreaming about?”Alice said “Nobody can guess that.”“Why, about _you_!” Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his handstriumphantly. “And if he left off dreaming about you, where do yousuppose you’d be?”“Where I am now, of course,” said Alice.“Not you!” Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. “You’d be nowhere. Why,you’re only a sort of thing in his dream!”“If that there King was to wake,” added Tweedledum, “you’d goout—bang!—just like a candle!”“I shouldn’t!” Alice exclaimed indignantly. “Besides, if _I’m_ only asort of thing in his dream, what are _you_, I should like to know?”“Ditto” said Tweedledum.“Ditto, ditto” cried Tweedledee.He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn’t help saying, “Hush! You’llbe waking him, I’m afraid, if you make so much noise.”“Well, it no use _your_ talking about waking him,” said Tweedledum,“when you’re only one of the things in his dream. You know very wellyou’re not real.”“I _am_ real!” said Alice and began to cry.“You won’t make yourself a bit realler by crying,” Tweedledee remarked:“there’s nothing to cry about.”“If I wasn’t real,” Alice said—half-laughing through her tears, it allseemed so ridiculous—“I shouldn’t be able to cry.”“I hope you don’t suppose those are real tears?” Tweedledum interruptedin a tone of great contempt.“I know they’re talking nonsense,” Alice thought to herself: “and it’sfoolish to cry about it.” So she brushed away her tears, and went on ascheerfully as she could. “At any rate I’d better be getting out of thewood, for really it’s coming on very dark. Do you think it’s going torain?”Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over himself and his brother, andlooked up into it. “No, I don’t think it is,” he said: “at least—notunder _here_. Nohow.”“But it may rain _outside_?”“It may—if it chooses,” said Tweedledee: “we’ve no objection.Contrariwise.”“Selfish things!” thought Alice, and she was just going to say“Good-night” and leave them, when Tweedledum sprang out from under theumbrella and seized her by the wrist.“Do you see _that_?” he said, in a voice choking with passion, and hiseyes grew large and yellow all in a moment, as he pointed with atrembling finger at a small white thing lying under the tree.“It’s only a rattle,” Alice said, after a careful examination of thelittle white thing. “Not a rattle-_snake_, you know,” she addedhastily, thinking that he was frightened: “only an old rattle—quite oldand broken.”“I knew it was!” cried Tweedledum, beginning to stamp about wildly andtear his hair. “It’s spoilt, of course!” Here he looked at Tweedledee,who immediately sat down on the ground, and tried to hide himself underthe umbrella.Alice laid her hand upon his arm, and said in a soothing tone, “Youneedn’t be so angry about an old rattle.”“But it isn’t old!” Tweedledum cried, in a greater fury than ever.“It’s new, I tell you—I bought it yesterday—my nice new RATTLE!” andhis voice rose to a perfect scream.All this time Tweedledee was trying his best to fold up the umbrella,with himself in it: which was such an extraordinary thing to do, thatit quite took off Alice’s attention from the angry brother. But hecouldn’t quite succeed, and it ended in his rolling over, bundled up inthe umbrella, with only his head out: and there he lay, opening andshutting his mouth and his large eyes—“looking more like a fish thananything else,” Alice thought.“Of course you agree to have a battle?” Tweedledum said in a calmertone.“I suppose so,” the other sulkily replied, as he crawled out of theumbrella: “only _she_ must help us to dress up, you know.”So the two brothers went off hand-in-hand into the wood, and returnedin a minute with their arms full of things—such as bolsters, blankets,hearth-rugs, table-cloths, dish-covers and coal-scuttles. “I hopeyou’re a good hand at pinning and tying strings?” Tweedledum remarked.“Every one of these things has got to go on, somehow or other.”Alice said afterwards she had never seen such a fuss made aboutanything in all her life—the way those two bustled about—and thequantity of things they put on—and the trouble they gave her in tyingstrings and fastening buttons—“Really they’ll be more like bundles ofold clothes than anything else, by the time they’re ready!” she said toherself, as she arranged a bolster round the neck of Tweedledee, “tokeep his head from being cut off,” as he said.“You know,” he added very gravely, “it’s one of the most serious thingsthat can possibly happen to one in a battle—to get one’s head cut off.”Alice laughed aloud: but she managed to turn it into a cough, for fearof hurting his feelings.“Do I look very pale?” said Tweedledum, coming up to have his helmettied on. (He _called_ it a helmet, though it certainly looked much morelike a saucepan.)“Well—yes—a _little_,” Alice replied gently.“I’m very brave generally,” he went on in a low voice: “only to-day Ihappen to have a headache.”“And _I’ve_ got a toothache!” said Tweedledee, who had overheard theremark. “I’m far worse off than you!”“Then you’d better not fight to-day,” said Alice, thinking it a goodopportunity to make peace.“We _must_ have a bit of a fight, but I don’t care about going onlong,” said Tweedledum. “What’s the time now?”Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said “Half-past four.”“Let’s fight till six, and then have dinner,” said Tweedledum.“Very well,” the other said, rather sadly: “and _she_ can watch us—onlyyou’d better not come _very_ close,” he added: “I generally hiteverything I can see—when I get really excited.”“And _I_ hit everything within reach,” cried Tweedledum, “whether I cansee it or not!”Alice laughed. “You must hit the _trees_ pretty often, I should think,”she said.Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied smile. “I don’t suppose,”he said, “there’ll be a tree left standing, for ever so far round, bythe time we’ve finished!”“And all about a rattle!” said Alice, still hoping to make them a_little_ ashamed of fighting for such a trifle.“I shouldn’t have minded it so much,” said Tweedledum, “if it hadn’tbeen a new one.”“I wish the monstrous crow would come!” thought Alice.“There’s only one sword, you know,” Tweedledum said to his brother:“but you can have the umbrella—it’s quite as sharp. Only we must beginquick. It’s getting as dark as it can.”“And darker,” said Tweedledee.It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice thought there must be athunderstorm coming on. “What a thick black cloud that is!” she said.“And how fast it comes! Why, I do believe it’s got wings!”“It’s the crow!” Tweedledum cried out in a shrill voice of alarm: andthe two brothers took to their heels and were out of sight in a moment.Alice ran a little way into the wood, and stopped under a large tree.“It can never get at me _here_,” she thought: “it’s far too large tosqueeze itself in among the trees. But I wish it wouldn’t flap itswings so—it makes quite a hurricane in the wood—here’s somebody’s shawlbeing blown away!”CHAPTER V.Wool and WaterShe caught the shawl as she spoke, and looked about for the owner: inanother moment the White Queen came running wildly through the wood,with both arms stretched out wide, as if she were flying, and Alicevery civilly went to meet her with the shawl.“I’m very glad I happened to be in the way,” Alice said, as she helpedher to put on her shawl again.The White Queen only looked at her in a helpless frightened sort ofway, and kept repeating something in a whisper to herself that soundedlike “bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter,” and Alice felt that if therewas to be any conversation at all, she must manage it herself. So shebegan rather timidly: “Am I addressing the White Queen?”“Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing,” The Queen said. “It isn’t_my_ notion of the thing, at all.”Alice thought it would never do to have an argument at the verybeginning of their conversation, so she smiled and said, “If yourMajesty will only tell me the right way to begin, I’ll do it as well asI can.”“But I don’t want it done at all!” groaned the poor Queen. “I’ve beena-dressing myself for the last two hours.”It would have been all the better, as it seemed to Alice, if she hadgot some one else to dress her, she was so dreadfully untidy. “Everysingle thing’s crooked,” Alice thought to herself, “and she’s all overpins!—may I put your shawl straight for you?” she added aloud.“I don’t know what’s the matter with it!” the Queen said, in amelancholy voice. “It’s out of temper, I think. I’ve pinned it here,and I’ve pinned it there, but there’s no pleasing it!”“It _can’t_ go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one side,”Alice said, as she gently put it right for her; “and, dear me, what astate your hair is in!”“The brush has got entangled in it!” the Queen said with a sigh. “And Ilost the comb yesterday.”Alice carefully released the brush, and did her best to get the hairinto order. “Come, you look rather better now!” she said, afteraltering most of the pins. “But really you should have a lady’s maid!”“I’m sure I’ll take you with pleasure!” the Queen said. “Twopence aweek, and jam every other day.”Alice couldn’t help laughing, as she said, “I don’t want you to hire_me_—and I don’t care for jam.”“It’s very good jam,” said the Queen.“Well, I don’t want any _to-day_, at any rate.”“You couldn’t have it if you _did_ want it,” the Queen said. “The ruleis, jam to-morrow and jam yesterday—but never jam to-day.”“It _must_ come sometimes to ‘jam to-day,’” Alice objected.“No, it can’t,” said the Queen. “It’s jam every _other_ day: to-dayisn’t any _other_ day, you know.”“I don’t understand you,” said Alice. “It’s dreadfully confusing!”“That’s the effect of living backwards,” the Queen said kindly: “italways makes one a little giddy at first—”“Living backwards!” Alice repeated in great astonishment. “I neverheard of such a thing!”“—but there’s one great advantage in it, that one’s memory works bothways.”“I’m sure _mine_ only works one way,” Alice remarked. “I can’t rememberthings before they happen.”“It’s a poor sort of memory that only works backwards,” the Queenremarked.“What sort of things do _you_ remember best?” Alice ventured to ask.“Oh, things that happened the week after next,” the Queen replied in acareless tone. “For instance, now,” she went on, sticking a large pieceof plaster on her finger as she spoke, “there’s the King’s Messenger.He’s in prison now, being punished: and the trial doesn’t even begintill next Wednesday: and of course the crime comes last of all.”“Suppose he never commits the crime?” said Alice.“That would be all the better, wouldn’t it?” the Queen said, as shebound the plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon.Alice felt there was no denying _that_. “Of course it would be all thebetter,” she said: “but it wouldn’t be all the better his beingpunished.”“You’re wrong _there_, at any rate,” said the Queen: “were _you_ everpunished?”“Only for faults,” said Alice.“And you were all the better for it, I know!” the Queen saidtriumphantly.“Yes, but then I _had_ done the things I was punished for,” said Alice:“that makes all the difference.”“But if you _hadn’t_ done them,” the Queen said, “that would have beenbetter still; better, and better, and better!” Her voice went higherwith each “better,” till it got quite to a squeak at last.Alice was just beginning to say “There’s a mistake somewhere—,” whenthe Queen began screaming so loud that she had to leave the sentenceunfinished. “Oh, oh, oh!” shouted the Queen, shaking her hand about asif she wanted to shake it off. “My finger’s bleeding! Oh, oh, oh, oh!”Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a steam-engine, thatAlice had to hold both her hands over her ears.“What _is_ the matter?” she said, as soon as there was a chance ofmaking herself heard. “Have you pricked your finger?”“I haven’t pricked it _yet_,” the Queen said, “but I soon shall—oh, oh,oh!”“When do you expect to do it?” Alice asked, feeling very much inclinedto laugh.“When I fasten my shawl again,” the poor Queen groaned out: “the broochwill come undone directly. Oh, oh!” As she said the words the broochflew open, and the Queen clutched wildly at it, and tried to clasp itagain.“Take care!” cried Alice. “You’re holding it all crooked!” And shecaught at the brooch; but it was too late: the pin had slipped, and theQueen had pricked her finger.“That accounts for the bleeding, you see,” she said to Alice with asmile. “Now you understand the way things happen here.”“But why don’t you scream now?” Alice asked, holding her hands ready toput over her ears again.“Why, I’ve done all the screaming already,” said the Queen. “What wouldbe the good of having it all over again?”By this time it was getting light. “The crow must have flown away, Ithink,” said Alice: “I’m so glad it’s gone. I thought it was the nightcoming on.”“I wish _I_ could manage to be glad!” the Queen said. “Only I never canremember the rule. You must be very happy, living in this wood, andbeing glad whenever you like!”“Only it is so _very_ lonely here!” Alice said in a melancholy voice;and at the thought of her loneliness two large tears came rolling downher cheeks.“Oh, don’t go on like that!” cried the poor Queen, wringing her handsin despair. “Consider what a great girl you are. Consider what a longway you’ve come to-day. Consider what o’clock it is. Consider anything,only don’t cry!”Alice could not help laughing at this, even in the midst of her tears.“Can _you_ keep from crying by considering things?” she asked.“That’s the way it’s done,” the Queen said with great decision: “nobodycan do two things at once, you know. Let’s consider your age to beginwith—how old are you?”“I’m seven and a half exactly.”“You needn’t say ‘exactually,’” the Queen remarked: “I can believe itwithout that. Now I’ll give _you_ something to believe. I’m just onehundred and one, five months and a day.”“I can’t believe _that_!” said Alice.“Can’t you?” the Queen said in a pitying tone. “Try again: draw a longbreath, and shut your eyes.”Alice laughed. “There’s no use trying,” she said: “one _can’t_ believeimpossible things.”“I daresay you haven’t had much practice,” said the Queen. “When I wasyour age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I’vebelieved as many as six impossible things before breakfast. There goesthe shawl again!”The brooch had come undone as she spoke, and a sudden gust of wind blewthe Queen’s shawl across a little brook. The Queen spread out her armsagain, and went flying after it, and this time she succeeded incatching it for herself. “I’ve got it!” she cried in a triumphant tone.“Now you shall see me pin it on again, all by myself!”“Then I hope your finger is better now?” Alice said very politely, asshe crossed the little brook after the Queen.*      *      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      *      *“Oh, much better!” cried the Queen, her voice rising to a squeak as shewent on. “Much be-etter! Be-etter! Be-e-e-etter! Be-e-ehh!” The lastword ended in a long bleat, so like a sheep that Alice quite started.She looked at the Queen, who seemed to have suddenly wrapped herself upin wool. Alice rubbed her eyes, and looked again. She couldn’t make outwhat had happened at all. Was she in a shop? And was that really—was itreally a _sheep_ that was sitting on the other side of the counter? Rubas she could, she could make nothing more of it: she was in a littledark shop, leaning with her elbows on the counter, and opposite to herwas an old Sheep, sitting in an arm-chair knitting, and every now andthen leaving off to look at her through a great pair of spectacles.“What is it you want to buy?” the Sheep said at last, looking up for amoment from her knitting.“I don’t _quite_ know yet,” Alice said, very gently. “I should like tolook all round me first, if I might.”“You may look in front of you, and on both sides, if you like,” saidthe Sheep: “but you can’t look _all_ round you—unless you’ve got eyesat the back of your head.”But these, as it happened, Alice had _not_ got: so she contentedherself with turning round, looking at the shelves as she came to them.The shop seemed to be full of all manner of curious things—but theoddest part of it all was, that whenever she looked hard at any shelf,to make out exactly what it had on it, that particular shelf was alwaysquite empty: though the others round it were crowded as full as theycould hold.“Things flow about so here!” she said at last in a plaintive tone,after she had spent a minute or so in vainly pursuing a large brightthing, that looked sometimes like a doll and sometimes like a work-box,and was always in the shelf next above the one she was looking at. “Andthis one is the most provoking of all—but I’ll tell you what—” sheadded, as a sudden thought struck her, “I’ll follow it up to the verytop shelf of all. It’ll puzzle it to go through the ceiling, I expect!”But even this plan failed: the “thing” went through the ceiling asquietly as possible, as if it were quite used to it.“Are you a child or a teetotum?” the Sheep said, as she took up anotherpair of needles. “You’ll make me giddy soon, if you go on turning roundlike that.” She was now working with fourteen pairs at once, and Alicecouldn’t help looking at her in great astonishment.“How _can_ she knit with so many?” the puzzled child thought toherself. “She gets more and more like a porcupine every minute!”“Can you row?” the Sheep asked, handing her a pair of knitting-needlesas she spoke.“Yes, a little—but not on land—and not with needles—” Alice wasbeginning to say, when suddenly the needles turned into oars in herhands, and she found they were in a little boat, gliding along betweenbanks: so there was nothing for it but to do her best.“Feather!” cried the Sheep, as she took up another pair of needles.This didn’t sound like a remark that needed any answer, so Alice saidnothing, but pulled away. There was something very queer about thewater, she thought, as every now and then the oars got fast in it, andwould hardly come out again.“Feather! Feather!” the Sheep cried again, taking more needles. “You’llbe catching a crab directly.”“A dear little crab!” thought Alice. “I should like that.”“Didn’t you hear me say ‘Feather’?” the Sheep cried angrily, taking upquite a bunch of needles.“Indeed I did,” said Alice: “you’ve said it very often—and very loud.Please, where _are_ the crabs?”“In the water, of course!” said the Sheep, sticking some of the needlesinto her hair, as her hands were full. “Feather, I say!”“_Why_ do you say ‘feather’ so often?” Alice asked at last, rathervexed. “I’m not a bird!”“You are,” said the Sheep: “you’re a little goose.”This offended Alice a little, so there was no more conversation for aminute or two, while the boat glided gently on, sometimes among beds ofweeds (which made the oars stick fast in the water, worse then ever),and sometimes under trees, but always with the same tall river-banksfrowning over their heads.“Oh, please! There are some scented rushes!” Alice cried in a suddentransport of delight. “There really are—and _such_ beauties!”“You needn’t say ‘please’ to _me_ about “em,” the Sheep said, withoutlooking up from her knitting: “I didn’t put “em there, and I’m notgoing to take “em away.”“No, but I meant—please, may we wait and pick some?” Alice pleaded. “Ifyou don’t mind stopping the boat for a minute.”“How am _I_ to stop it?” said the Sheep. “If you leave off rowing,it’ll stop of itself.”So the boat was left to drift down the stream as it would, till itglided gently in among the waving rushes. And then the little sleeveswere carefully rolled up, and the little arms were plunged inelbow-deep to get the rushes a good long way down before breaking themoff—and for a while Alice forgot all about the Sheep and the knitting,as she bent over the side of the boat, with just the ends of hertangled hair dipping into the water—while with bright eager eyes shecaught at one bunch after another of the darling scented rushes.“I only hope the boat won’t tipple over!” she said to herself. “Oh,_what_ a lovely one! Only I couldn’t quite reach it.” “And it certainly_did_ seem a little provoking (“almost as if it happened on purpose,”she thought) that, though she managed to pick plenty of beautifulrushes as the boat glided by, there was always a more lovely one thatshe couldn’t reach.“The prettiest are always further!” she said at last, with a sigh atthe obstinacy of the rushes in growing so far off, as, with flushedcheeks and dripping hair and hands, she scrambled back into her place,and began to arrange her new-found treasures.What mattered it to her just then that the rushes had begun to fade,and to lose all their scent and beauty, from the very moment that shepicked them? Even real scented rushes, you know, last only a verylittle while—and these, being dream-rushes, melted away almost likesnow, as they lay in heaps at her feet—but Alice hardly noticed this,there were so many other curious things to think about.They hadn’t gone much farther before the blade of one of the oars gotfast in the water and _wouldn’t_ come out again (so Alice explained itafterwards), and the consequence was that the handle of it caught herunder the chin, and, in spite of a series of little shrieks of “Oh, oh,oh!” from poor Alice, it swept her straight off the seat, and downamong the heap of rushes.However, she wasn’t hurt, and was soon up again: the Sheep went on withher knitting all the while, just as if nothing had happened. “That wasa nice crab you caught!” she remarked, as Alice got back into herplace, very much relieved to find herself still in the boat.“Was it? I didn’t see it,” Said Alice, peeping cautiously over the sideof the boat into the dark water. “I wish it hadn’t let go—I should solike to see a little crab to take home with me!” But the Sheep onlylaughed scornfully, and went on with her knitting.“Are there many crabs here?” said Alice.“Crabs, and all sorts of things,” said the Sheep: “plenty of choice,only make up your mind. Now, what _do_ you want to buy?”“To buy!” Alice echoed in a tone that was half astonished and halffrightened—for the oars, and the boat, and the river, had vanished allin a moment, and she was back again in the little dark shop.“I should like to buy an egg, please,” she said timidly. “How do yousell them?”“Fivepence farthing for one—Twopence for two,” the Sheep replied.“Then two are cheaper than one?” Alice said in a surprised tone, takingout her purse.“Only you _must_ eat them both, if you buy two,” said the Sheep.“Then I’ll have _one_, please,” said Alice, as she put the money downon the counter. For she thought to herself, “They mightn’t be at allnice, you know.”The Sheep took the money, and put it away in a box: then she said “Inever put things into people’s hands—that would never do—you must getit for yourself.” And so saying, she went off to the other end of theshop, and set the egg upright on a shelf.“I wonder _why_ it wouldn’t do?” thought Alice, as she groped her wayamong the tables and chairs, for the shop was very dark towards theend. “The egg seems to get further away the more I walk towards it. Letme see, is this a chair? Why, it’s got branches, I declare! How veryodd to find trees growing here! And actually here’s a little brook!Well, this is the very queerest shop I ever saw!”*      *      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      *      *So she went on, wondering more and more at every step, as everythingturned into a tree the moment she came up to it, and she quite expectedthe egg to do the same.CHAPTER VI.Humpty DumptyHowever, the egg only got larger and larger, and more and more human:when she had come within a few yards of it, she saw that it had eyesand a nose and mouth; and when she had come close to it, she sawclearly that it was HUMPTY DUMPTY himself. “It can’t be anybody else!”she said to herself. “I’m as certain of it, as if his name were writtenall over his face.”It might have been written a hundred times, easily, on that enormousface. Humpty Dumpty was sitting with his legs crossed, like a Turk, onthe top of a high wall—such a narrow one that Alice quite wondered howhe could keep his balance—and, as his eyes were steadily fixed in theopposite direction, and he didn’t take the least notice of her, shethought he must be a stuffed figure after all.“And how exactly like an egg he is!” she said aloud, standing with herhands ready to catch him, for she was every moment expecting him tofall.“It’s _very_ provoking,” Humpty Dumpty said after a long silence,looking away from Alice as he spoke, “to be called an egg—_Very!_”“I said you _looked_ like an egg, Sir,” Alice gently explained. “Andsome eggs are very pretty, you know” she added, hoping to turn herremark into a sort of a compliment.“Some people,” said Humpty Dumpty, looking away from her as usual,“have no more sense than a baby!”Alice didn’t know what to say to this: it wasn’t at all likeconversation, she thought, as he never said anything to _her_; in fact,his last remark was evidently addressed to a tree—so she stood andsoftly repeated to herself:—“Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall:Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.All the King’s horses and all the King’s menCouldn’t put Humpty Dumpty in his place again.”“That last line is much too long for the poetry,” she added, almost outloud, forgetting that Humpty Dumpty would hear her.“Don’t stand there chattering to yourself like that,” Humpty Dumptysaid, looking at her for the first time, “but tell me your name andyour business.”“My _name_ is Alice, but—”“It’s a stupid enough name!” Humpty Dumpty interrupted impatiently.“What does it mean?”“_Must_ a name mean something?” Alice asked doubtfully.“Of course it must,” Humpty Dumpty said with a short laugh: “_my_ namemeans the shape I am—and a good handsome shape it is, too. With a namelike yours, you might be any shape, almost.”“Why do you sit out here all alone?” said Alice, not wishing to beginan argument.“Why, because there’s nobody with me!” cried Humpty Dumpty. “Did youthink I didn’t know the answer to _that_? Ask another.”“Don’t you think you’d be safer down on the ground?” Alice went on, notwith any idea of making another riddle, but simply in her good-naturedanxiety for the queer creature. “That wall is so _very_ narrow!”“What tremendously easy riddles you ask!” Humpty Dumpty growled out.“Of course I don’t think so! Why, if ever I _did_ fall off—whichthere’s no chance of—but _if_ I did—” Here he pursed his lips andlooked so solemn and grand that Alice could hardly help laughing. “_If_I did fall,” he went on, “_The King has promised me—with his very ownmouth_—to—to—”“To send all his horses and all his men,” Alice interrupted, ratherunwisely.“Now I declare that’s too bad!” Humpty Dumpty cried, breaking into asudden passion. “You’ve been listening at doors—and behind trees—anddown chimneys—or you couldn’t have known it!”“I haven’t, indeed!” Alice said very gently. “It’s in a book.”“Ah, well! They may write such things in a _book_,” Humpty Dumpty saidin a calmer tone. “That’s what you call a History of England, that is.Now, take a good look at me! I’m one that has spoken to a King, _I_ am:mayhap you’ll never see such another: and to show you I’m not proud,you may shake hands with me!” And he grinned almost from ear to ear, ashe leant forwards (and as nearly as possible fell off the wall in doingso) and offered Alice his hand. She watched him a little anxiously asshe took it. “If he smiled much more, the ends of his mouth might meetbehind,” she thought: “and then I don’t know what would happen to hishead! I’m afraid it would come off!”“Yes, all his horses and all his men,” Humpty Dumpty went on. “They’dpick me up again in a minute, _they_ would! However, this conversationis going on a little too fast: let’s go back to the last remark butone.”“I’m afraid I can’t quite remember it,” Alice said very politely.“In that case we start fresh,” said Humpty Dumpty, “and it’s my turn tochoose a subject—” (“He talks about it just as if it was a game!”thought Alice.) “So here’s a question for you. How old did you say youwere?”Alice made a short calculation, and said “Seven years and six months.”“Wrong!” Humpty Dumpty exclaimed triumphantly. “You never said a wordlike it!”“I though you meant ‘How old _are_ you?’” Alice explained.“If I’d meant that, I’d have said it,” said Humpty Dumpty.Alice didn’t want to begin another argument, so she said nothing.“Seven years and six months!” Humpty Dumpty repeated thoughtfully. “Anuncomfortable sort of age. Now if you’d asked _my_ advice, I’d havesaid ‘Leave off at seven’—but it’s too late now.”“I never ask advice about growing,” Alice said indignantly.“Too proud?” the other inquired.Alice felt even more indignant at this suggestion. “I mean,” she said,“that one can’t help growing older.”“_One_ can’t, perhaps,” said Humpty Dumpty, “but _two_ can. With properassistance, you might have left off at seven.”“What a beautiful belt you’ve got on!” Alice suddenly remarked.(They had had quite enough of the subject of age, she thought: and ifthey really were to take turns in choosing subjects, it was her turnnow.) “At least,” she corrected herself on second thoughts, “abeautiful cravat, I should have said—no, a belt, I mean—I beg yourpardon!” she added in dismay, for Humpty Dumpty looked thoroughlyoffended, and she began to wish she hadn’t chosen that subject. “If Ionly knew,” she thought to herself, “which was neck and which waswaist!”Evidently Humpty Dumpty was very angry, though he said nothing for aminute or two. When he _did_ speak again, it was in a deep growl.“It is a—_most—provoking_—thing,” he said at last, “when a persondoesn’t know a cravat from a belt!”“I know it’s very ignorant of me,” Alice said, in so humble a tone thatHumpty Dumpty relented.“It’s a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as you say. It’s a presentfrom the White King and Queen. There now!”“Is it really?” said Alice, quite pleased to find that she _had_ chosena good subject, after all.“They gave it me,” Humpty Dumpty continued thoughtfully, as he crossedone knee over the other and clasped his hands round it, “they gave itme—for an un-birthday present.”“I beg your pardon?” Alice said with a puzzled air.“I’m not offended,” said Humpty Dumpty.“I mean, what _is_ an un-birthday present?”“A present given when it isn’t your birthday, of course.”Alice considered a little. “I like birthday presents best,” she said atlast.“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” cried Humpty Dumpty. “Howmany days are there in a year?”“Three hundred and sixty-five,” said Alice.“And how many birthdays have you?”“One.”“And if you take one from three hundred and sixty-five, what remains?”“Three hundred and sixty-four, of course.”Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. “I’d rather see that done on paper,” hesaid.Alice couldn’t help smiling as she took out her memorandum-book, andworked the sum for him:3651____364___Humpty Dumpty took the book, and looked at it carefully. “That seems tobe done right—” he began.“You’re holding it upside down!” Alice interrupted.“To be sure I was!” Humpty Dumpty said gaily, as she turned it roundfor him. “I thought it looked a little queer. As I was saying, that_seems_ to be done right—though I haven’t time to look it overthoroughly just now—and that shows that there are three hundred andsixty-four days when you might get un-birthday presents—”“Certainly,” said Alice.“And only _one_ for birthday presents, you know. There’s glory foryou!”“I don’t know what you mean by ‘glory,’” Alice said.Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. “Of course you don’t—till I tellyou. I meant ‘there’s a nice knock-down argument for you!’”“But ‘glory’ doesn’t mean ‘a nice knock-down argument,’” Aliceobjected.“When _I_ use a word,” Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone,“it means just what I choose it to mean—neither more nor less.”“The question is,” said Alice, “whether you _can_ make words mean somany different things.”“The question is,” said Humpty Dumpty, “which is to be master—that’sall.”Alice was too much puzzled to say anything, so after a minute HumptyDumpty began again. “They’ve a temper, some of them—particularly verbs,they’re the proudest—adjectives you can do anything with, but notverbs—however, _I_ can manage the whole lot of them! Impenetrability!That’s what _I_ say!”“Would you tell me, please,” said Alice “what that means?”“Now you talk like a reasonable child,” said Humpty Dumpty, lookingvery much pleased. “I meant by ‘impenetrability’ that we’ve had enoughof that subject, and it would be just as well if you’d mention what youmean to do next, as I suppose you don’t mean to stop here all the restof your life.”“That’s a great deal to make one word mean,” Alice said in a thoughtfultone.“When I make a word do a lot of work like that,” said Humpty Dumpty, “Ialways pay it extra.”“Oh!” said Alice. She was too much puzzled to make any other remark.“Ah, you should see “em come round me of a Saturday night,” HumptyDumpty went on, wagging his head gravely from side to side: “for to gettheir wages, you know.”(Alice didn’t venture to ask what he paid them with; and so you see Ican’t tell _you_.)“You seem very clever at explaining words, Sir,” said Alice. “Would youkindly tell me the meaning of the poem called ‘Jabberwocky’?”“Let’s hear it,” said Humpty Dumpty. “I can explain all the poems thatwere ever invented—and a good many that haven’t been invented justyet.”This sounded very hopeful, so Alice repeated the first verse:’Twas brillig, and the slithy tovesDid gyre and gimble in the wabe;All mimsy were the borogoves,And the mome raths outgrabe.“That’s enough to begin with,” Humpty Dumpty interrupted: “there areplenty of hard words there. ‘_Brillig_’ means four o’clock in theafternoon—the time when you begin _broiling_ things for dinner.”“That’ll do very well,” said Alice: “and ‘_slithy_’?”“Well, ‘_slithy_’ means ‘lithe and slimy.’ ‘Lithe’ is the same as‘active.’ You see it’s like a portmanteau—there are two meanings packedup into one word.”“I see it now,” Alice remarked thoughtfully: “and what are ‘_toves_’?”“Well, ‘_toves_’ are something like badgers—they’re something likelizards—and they’re something like corkscrews.”“They must be very curious looking creatures.”“They are that,” said Humpty Dumpty: “also they make their nests undersun-dials—also they live on cheese.”“And what’s the ‘_gyre_’ and to ‘_gimble_’?”“To ‘_gyre_’ is to go round and round like a gyroscope. To ‘_gimble_’is to make holes like a gimlet.”“And ‘_the wabe_’ is the grass-plot round a sun-dial, I suppose?” saidAlice, surprised at her own ingenuity.“Of course it is. It’s called ‘_wabe_,’ you know, because it goes along way before it, and a long way behind it—”“And a long way beyond it on each side,” Alice added.“Exactly so. Well, then, ‘_mimsy_’ is ‘flimsy and miserable’ (there’sanother portmanteau for you). And a ‘_borogove_’ is a thinshabby-looking bird with its feathers sticking out all round—somethinglike a live mop.”“And then ‘_mome raths_’?” said Alice. “I’m afraid I’m giving you agreat deal of trouble.”“Well, a ‘_rath_’ is a sort of green pig: but ‘_mome_’ I’m not certainabout. I think it’s short for ‘from home’—meaning that they’d losttheir way, you know.”“And what does ‘_outgrabe_’ mean?”“Well, ‘_outgrabing_’ is something between bellowing and whistling,with a kind of sneeze in the middle: however, you’ll hear it done,maybe—down in the wood yonder—and when you’ve once heard it you’ll be_quite_ content. Who’s been repeating all that hard stuff to you?”“I read it in a book,” said Alice. “But I had some poetry repeated tome, much easier than that, by—Tweedledee, I think it was.”“As to poetry, you know,” said Humpty Dumpty, stretching out one of hisgreat hands, “_I_ can repeat poetry as well as other folk, if it comesto that—”“Oh, it needn’t come to that!” Alice hastily said, hoping to keep himfrom beginning.“The piece I’m going to repeat,” he went on without noticing herremark, “was written entirely for your amusement.”Alice felt that in that case she really _ought_ to listen to it, so shesat down, and said “Thank you” rather sadly.“In winter, when the fields are white,I sing this song for your delight—only I don’t sing it,” he added, as an explanation.“I see you don’t,” said Alice.“If you can _see_ whether I’m singing or not, you’ve sharper eyes thanmost.” Humpty Dumpty remarked severely. Alice was silent.“In spring, when woods are getting green,I’ll try and tell you what I mean.”“Thank you very much,” said Alice.“In summer, when the days are long,Perhaps you’ll understand the song:In autumn, when the leaves are brown,Take pen and ink, and write it down.”“I will, if I can remember it so long,” said Alice.“You needn’t go on making remarks like that,” Humpty Dumpty said:“they’re not sensible, and they put me out.”“I sent a message to the fish:I told them ‘This is what I wish.’The little fishes of the sea,They sent an answer back to me.The little fishes’ answer was‘We cannot do it, Sir, because—‘”“I’m afraid I don’t quite understand,” said Alice.“It gets easier further on,” Humpty Dumpty replied.“I sent to them again to say‘It will be better to obey.’The fishes answered with a grin,‘Why, what a temper you are in!’I told them once, I told them twice:They would not listen to advice.I took a kettle large and new,Fit for the deed I had to do.My heart went hop, my heart went thump;I filled the kettle at the pump.Then some one came to me and said,‘The little fishes are in bed.’I said to him, I said it plain,‘Then you must wake them up again.’I said it very loud and clear;I went and shouted in his ear.”Humpty Dumpty raised his voice almost to a scream as he repeated thisverse, and Alice thought with a shudder, “I wouldn’t have been themessenger for _anything_!”“But he was very stiff and proud;He said ‘You needn’t shout so loud!’And he was very proud and stiff;He said ‘I’d go and wake them, if—’I took a corkscrew from the shelf:I went to wake them up myself.And when I found the door was locked,I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked.And when I found the door was shut,I tried to turn the handle, but—”There was a long pause.“Is that all?” Alice timidly asked.“That’s all,” said Humpty Dumpty. “Good-bye.”This was rather sudden, Alice thought: but, after such a _very_ stronghint that she ought to be going, she felt that it would hardly be civilto stay. So she got up, and held out her hand. “Good-bye, till we meetagain!” she said as cheerfully as she could.“I shouldn’t know you again if we _did_ meet,” Humpty Dumpty replied ina discontented tone, giving her one of his fingers to shake; “you’re soexactly like other people.”“The face is what one goes by, generally,” Alice remarked in athoughtful tone.“That’s just what I complain of,” said Humpty Dumpty. “Your face is thesame as everybody has—the two eyes, so—” (marking their places in theair with this thumb) “nose in the middle, mouth under. It’s always thesame. Now if you had the two eyes on the same side of the nose, forinstance—or the mouth at the top—that would be _some_ help.”“It wouldn’t look nice,” Alice objected. But Humpty Dumpty only shuthis eyes and said “Wait till you’ve tried.”Alice waited a minute to see if he would speak again, but as he neveropened his eyes or took any further notice of her, she said “Good-bye!”once more, and, getting no answer to this, she quietly walked away: butshe couldn’t help saying to herself as she went, “Of all theunsatisfactory—” (she repeated this aloud, as it was a great comfort tohave such a long word to say) “of all the unsatisfactory people I_ever_ met—” She never finished the sentence, for at this moment aheavy crash shook the forest from end to end.CHAPTER VII.The Lion and the UnicornThe next moment soldiers came running through the wood, at first intwos and threes, then ten or twenty together, and at last in suchcrowds that they seemed to fill the whole forest. Alice got behind atree, for fear of being run over, and watched them go by.She thought that in all her life she had never seen soldiers souncertain on their feet: they were always tripping over something orother, and whenever one went down, several more always fell over him,so that the ground was soon covered with little heaps of men.Then came the horses. Having four feet, these managed rather betterthan the foot-soldiers: but even _they_ stumbled now and then; and itseemed to be a regular rule that, whenever a horse stumbled the riderfell off instantly. The confusion got worse every moment, and Alice wasvery glad to get out of the wood into an open place, where she foundthe White King seated on the ground, busily writing in hismemorandum-book.“I’ve sent them all!” the King cried in a tone of delight, on seeingAlice. “Did you happen to meet any soldiers, my dear, as you camethrough the wood?”“Yes, I did,” said Alice: “several thousand, I should think.”“Four thousand two hundred and seven, that’s the exact number,” theKing said, referring to his book. “I couldn’t send all the horses, youknow, because two of them are wanted in the game. And I haven’t sentthe two Messengers, either. They’re both gone to the town. Just lookalong the road, and tell me if you can see either of them.”“I see nobody on the road,” said Alice.“I only wish _I_ had such eyes,” the King remarked in a fretful tone.“To be able to see Nobody! And at that distance, too! Why, it’s as muchas _I_ can do to see real people, by this light!”All this was lost on Alice, who was still looking intently along theroad, shading her eyes with one hand. “I see somebody now!” sheexclaimed at last. “But he’s coming very slowly—and what curiousattitudes he goes into!” (For the messenger kept skipping up and down,and wriggling like an eel, as he came along, with his great handsspread out like fans on each side.)“Not at all,” said the King. “He’s an Anglo-Saxon Messenger—and thoseare Anglo-Saxon attitudes. He only does them when he’s happy. His nameis Haigha.” (He pronounced it so as to rhyme with “mayor.”)“I love my love with an H,” Alice couldn’t help beginning, “because heis Happy. I hate him with an H, because he is Hideous. I fed himwith—with—with Ham-sandwiches and Hay. His name is Haigha, and helives—”“He lives on the Hill,” the King remarked simply, without the leastidea that he was joining in the game, while Alice was still hesitatingfor the name of a town beginning with H. “The other Messenger’s calledHatta. I must have _two_, you know—to come and go. One to come, and oneto go.”“I beg your pardon?” said Alice.“It isn’t respectable to beg,” said the King.“I only meant that I didn’t understand,” said Alice. “Why one to comeand one to go?”“Didn’t I tell you?” the King repeated impatiently. “I must have_two_—to fetch and carry. One to fetch, and one to carry.”At this moment the Messenger arrived: he was far too much out of breathto say a word, and could only wave his hands about, and make the mostfearful faces at the poor King.“This young lady loves you with an H,” the King said, introducing Alicein the hope of turning off the Messenger’s attention from himself—butit was no use—the Anglo-Saxon attitudes only got more extraordinaryevery moment, while the great eyes rolled wildly from side to side.“You alarm me!” said the King. “I feel faint—Give me a ham sandwich!”On which the Messenger, to Alice’s great amusement, opened a bag thathung round his neck, and handed a sandwich to the King, who devoured itgreedily.“Another sandwich!” said the King.“There’s nothing but hay left now,” the Messenger said, peeping intothe bag.“Hay, then,” the King murmured in a faint whisper.Alice was glad to see that it revived him a good deal. “There’s nothinglike eating hay when you’re faint,” he remarked to her, as he munchedaway.“I should think throwing cold water over you would be better,” Alicesuggested: “or some sal-volatile.”“I didn’t say there was nothing _better_,” the King replied. “I saidthere was nothing _like_ it.” Which Alice did not venture to deny.“Who did you pass on the road?” the King went on, holding out his handto the Messenger for some more hay.“Nobody,” said the Messenger.“Quite right,” said the King: “this young lady saw him too. So ofcourse Nobody walks slower than you.”“I do my best,” the Messenger said in a sulky tone. “I’m sure nobodywalks much faster than I do!”“He can’t do that,” said the King, “or else he’d have been here first.However, now you’ve got your breath, you may tell us what’s happened inthe town.”“I’ll whisper it,” said the Messenger, putting his hands to his mouthin the shape of a trumpet, and stooping so as to get close to theKing’s ear. Alice was sorry for this, as she wanted to hear the newstoo. However, instead of whispering, he simply shouted at the top ofhis voice “They’re at it again!”“Do you call _that_ a whisper?” cried the poor King, jumping up andshaking himself. “If you do such a thing again, I’ll have you buttered!It went through and through my head like an earthquake!”“It would have to be a very tiny earthquake!” thought Alice. “Who areat it again?” she ventured to ask.“Why the Lion and the Unicorn, of course,” said the King.“Fighting for the crown?”“Yes, to be sure,” said the King: “and the best of the joke is, thatit’s _my_ crown all the while! Let’s run and see them.” And theytrotted off, Alice repeating to herself, as she ran, the words of theold song:—“The Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the crown:The Lion beat the Unicorn all round the town.Some gave them white bread, some gave them brown;Some gave them plum-cake and drummed them out of town.”“Does—the one—that wins—get the crown?” she asked, as well as shecould, for the run was putting her quite out of breath.“Dear me, no!” said the King. “What an idea!”“Would you—be good enough,” Alice panted out, after running a littlefurther, “to stop a minute—just to get—one’s breath again?”“I’m _good_ enough,” the King said, “only I’m not strong enough. Yousee, a minute goes by so fearfully quick. You might as well try to stopa Bandersnatch!”Alice had no more breath for talking, so they trotted on in silence,till they came in sight of a great crowd, in the middle of which theLion and Unicorn were fighting. They were in such a cloud of dust, thatat first Alice could not make out which was which: but she soon managedto distinguish the Unicorn by his horn.They placed themselves close to where Hatta, the other messenger, wasstanding watching the fight, with a cup of tea in one hand and a pieceof bread-and-butter in the other.“He’s only just out of prison, and he hadn’t finished his tea when hewas sent in,” Haigha whispered to Alice: “and they only give themoyster-shells in there—so you see he’s very hungry and thirsty. How areyou, dear child?” he went on, putting his arm affectionately roundHatta’s neck.Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on with his bread and butter.“Were you happy in prison, dear child?” said Haigha.Hatta looked round once more, and this time a tear or two trickled downhis cheek: but not a word would he say.“Speak, can’t you!” Haigha cried impatiently. But Hatta only munchedaway, and drank some more tea.“Speak, won’t you!” cried the King. “How are they getting on with thefight?”Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed a large piece ofbread-and-butter. “They’re getting on very well,” he said in a chokingvoice: “each of them has been down about eighty-seven times.”“Then I suppose they’ll soon bring the white bread and the brown?”Alice ventured to remark.“It’s waiting for “em now,” said Hatta: “this is a bit of it as I’meating.”There was a pause in the fight just then, and the Lion and the Unicornsat down, panting, while the King called out “Ten minutes allowed forrefreshments!” Haigha and Hatta set to work at once, carrying roughtrays of white and brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it was_very_ dry.“I don’t think they’ll fight any more to-day,” the King said to Hatta:“go and order the drums to begin.” And Hatta went bounding away like agrasshopper.For a minute or two Alice stood silent, watching him. Suddenly shebrightened up. “Look, look!” she cried, pointing eagerly. “There’s theWhite Queen running across the country! She came flying out of the woodover yonder—How fast those Queens _can_ run!”“There’s some enemy after her, no doubt,” the King said, without evenlooking round. “That wood’s full of them.”“But aren’t you going to run and help her?” Alice asked, very muchsurprised at his taking it so quietly.“No use, no use!” said the King. “She runs so fearfully quick. Youmight as well try to catch a Bandersnatch! But I’ll make a memorandumabout her, if you like—She’s a dear good creature,” he repeated softlyto himself, as he opened his memorandum-book. “Do you spell ‘creature’with a double ‘e’?”At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by them, with his hands in hispockets. “I had the best of it this time?” he said to the King, justglancing at him as he passed.“A little—a little,” the King replied, rather nervously. “You shouldn’thave run him through with your horn, you know.”“It didn’t hurt him,” the Unicorn said carelessly, and he was going on,when his eye happened to fall upon Alice: he turned round ratherinstantly, and stood for some time looking at her with an air of thedeepest disgust.“What—is—this?” he said at last.“This is a child!” Haigha replied eagerly, coming in front of Alice tointroduce her, and spreading out both his hands towards her in anAnglo-Saxon attitude. “We only found it to-day. It’s as large as life,and twice as natural!”“I always thought they were fabulous monsters!” said the Unicorn. “Isit alive?”“It can talk,” said Haigha, solemnly.The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and said “Talk, child.”Alice could not help her lips curling up into a smile as she began: “Doyou know, I always thought Unicorns were fabulous monsters, too! Inever saw one alive before!”“Well, now that we _have_ seen each other,” said the Unicorn, “ifyou’ll believe in me, I’ll believe in you. Is that a bargain?”“Yes, if you like,” said Alice.“Come, fetch out the plum-cake, old man!” the Unicorn went on, turningfrom her to the King. “None of your brown bread for me!”“Certainly—certainly!” the King muttered, and beckoned to Haigha. “Openthe bag!” he whispered. “Quick! Not that one—that’s full of hay!”Haigha took a large cake out of the bag, and gave it to Alice to hold,while he got out a dish and carving-knife. How they all came out of itAlice couldn’t guess. It was just like a conjuring-trick, she thought.The Lion had joined them while this was going on: he looked very tiredand sleepy, and his eyes were half shut. “What’s this!” he said,blinking lazily at Alice, and speaking in a deep hollow tone thatsounded like the tolling of a great bell.“Ah, what _is_ it, now?” the Unicorn cried eagerly. “You’ll neverguess! _I_ couldn’t.”The Lion looked at Alice wearily. “Are you animal—vegetable—ormineral?” he said, yawning at every other word.“It’s a fabulous monster!” the Unicorn cried out, before Alice couldreply.“Then hand round the plum-cake, Monster,” the Lion said, lying down andputting his chin on his paws. “And sit down, both of you,” (to the Kingand the Unicorn): “fair play with the cake, you know!”The King was evidently very uncomfortable at having to sit down betweenthe two great creatures; but there was no other place for him.“What a fight we might have for the crown, _now_!” the Unicorn said,looking slyly up at the crown, which the poor King was nearly shakingoff his head, he trembled so much.“I should win easy,” said the Lion.“I’m not so sure of that,” said the Unicorn.“Why, I beat you all round the town, you chicken!” the Lion repliedangrily, half getting up as he spoke.Here the King interrupted, to prevent the quarrel going on: he was verynervous, and his voice quite quivered. “All round the town?” he said.“That’s a good long way. Did you go by the old bridge, or themarket-place? You get the best view by the old bridge.”“I’m sure I don’t know,” the Lion growled out as he lay down again.“There was too much dust to see anything. What a time the Monster is,cutting up that cake!”Alice had seated herself on the bank of a little brook, with the greatdish on her knees, and was sawing away diligently with the knife. “It’svery provoking!” she said, in reply to the Lion (she was getting quiteused to being called “the Monster”). “I’ve cut several slices already,but they always join on again!”“You don’t know how to manage Looking-glass cakes,” the Unicornremarked. “Hand it round first, and cut it afterwards.”This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obediently got up, and carriedthe dish round, and the cake divided itself into three pieces as shedid so. “_Now_ cut it up,” said the Lion, as she returned to her placewith the empty dish.“I say, this isn’t fair!” cried the Unicorn, as Alice sat with theknife in her hand, very much puzzled how to begin. “The Monster hasgiven the Lion twice as much as me!”“She’s kept none for herself, anyhow,” said the Lion. “Do you likeplum-cake, Monster?”But before Alice could answer him, the drums began.Where the noise came from, she couldn’t make out: the air seemed fullof it, and it rang through and through her head till she felt quitedeafened. She started to her feet and sprang across the little brook inher terror,*      *      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      *      *and had just time to see the Lion and the Unicorn rise to their feet,with angry looks at being interrupted in their feast, before shedropped to her knees, and put her hands over her ears, vainly trying toshut out the dreadful uproar.“If _that_ doesn’t ‘drum them out of town,’” she thought to herself,“nothing ever will!”CHAPTER VIII.“It’s my own Invention”After a while the noise seemed gradually to die away, till all was deadsilence, and Alice lifted up her head in some alarm. There was no oneto be seen, and her first thought was that she must have been dreamingabout the Lion and the Unicorn and those queer Anglo-Saxon Messengers.However, there was the great dish still lying at her feet, on which shehad tried to cut the plum-cake, “So I wasn’t dreaming, after all,” shesaid to herself, “unless—unless we’re all part of the same dream. OnlyI do hope it’s _my_ dream, and not the Red King’s! I don’t likebelonging to another person’s dream,” she went on in a rathercomplaining tone: “I’ve a great mind to go and wake him, and see whathappens!”At this moment her thoughts were interrupted by a loud shouting of“Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!” and a Knight dressed in crimson armour camegalloping down upon her, brandishing a great club. Just as he reachedher, the horse stopped suddenly: “You’re my prisoner!” the Knightcried, as he tumbled off his horse.Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened for him than for herselfat the moment, and watched him with some anxiety as he mounted again.As soon as he was comfortably in the saddle, he began once more “You’remy—” but here another voice broke in “Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!” and Alicelooked round in some surprise for the new enemy.This time it was a White Knight. He drew up at Alice’s side, andtumbled off his horse just as the Red Knight had done: then he got onagain, and the two Knights sat and looked at each other for some timewithout speaking. Alice looked from one to the other in somebewilderment.“She’s _my_ prisoner, you know!” the Red Knight said at last.“Yes, but then _I_ came and rescued her!” the White Knight replied.“Well, we must fight for her, then,” said the Red Knight, as he took uphis helmet (which hung from the saddle, and was something the shape ofa horse’s head), and put it on.“You will observe the Rules of Battle, of course?” the White Knightremarked, putting on his helmet too.“I always do,” said the Red Knight, and they began banging away at eachother with such fury that Alice got behind a tree to be out of the wayof the blows.“I wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are,” she said to herself, asshe watched the fight, timidly peeping out from her hiding-place: “oneRule seems to be, that if one Knight hits the other, he knocks him offhis horse, and if he misses, he tumbles off himself—and another Ruleseems to be that they hold their clubs with their arms, as if they werePunch and Judy—What a noise they make when they tumble! Just like awhole set of fire-irons falling into the fender! And how quiet thehorses are! They let them get on and off them just as if they weretables!”Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not noticed, seemed to be thatthey always fell on their heads, and the battle ended with their bothfalling off in this way, side by side: when they got up again, theyshook hands, and then the Red Knight mounted and galloped off.“It was a glorious victory, wasn’t it?” said the White Knight, as hecame up panting.“I don’t know,” Alice said doubtfully. “I don’t want to be anybody’sprisoner. I want to be a Queen.”“So you will, when you’ve crossed the next brook,” said the WhiteKnight. “I’ll see you safe to the end of the wood—and then I must goback, you know. That’s the end of my move.”“Thank you very much,” said Alice. “May I help you off with yourhelmet?” It was evidently more than he could manage by himself;however, she managed to shake him out of it at last.“Now one can breathe more easily,” said the Knight, putting back hisshaggy hair with both hands, and turning his gentle face and large mildeyes to Alice. She thought she had never seen such a strange-lookingsoldier in all her life.He was dressed in tin armour, which seemed to fit him very badly, andhe had a queer-shaped little deal box fastened across his shoulder,upside-down, and with the lid hanging open. Alice looked at it withgreat curiosity.“I see you’re admiring my little box.” the Knight said in a friendlytone. “It’s my own invention—to keep clothes and sandwiches in. You seeI carry it upside-down, so that the rain can’t get in.”“But the things can get _out_,” Alice gently remarked. “Do you know thelid’s open?”“I didn’t know it,” the Knight said, a shade of vexation passing overhis face. “Then all the things must have fallen out! And the box is nouse without them.” He unfastened it as he spoke, and was just going tothrow it into the bushes, when a sudden thought seemed to strike him,and he hung it carefully on a tree. “Can you guess why I did that?” hesaid to Alice.Alice shook her head.“In hopes some bees may make a nest in it—then I should get the honey.”“But you’ve got a bee-hive—or something like one—fastened to thesaddle,” said Alice.“Yes, it’s a very good bee-hive,” the Knight said in a discontentedtone, “one of the best kind. But not a single bee has come near it yet.And the other thing is a mouse-trap. I suppose the mice keep the beesout—or the bees keep the mice out, I don’t know which.”“I was wondering what the mouse-trap was for,” said Alice. “It isn’tvery likely there would be any mice on the horse’s back.”“Not very likely, perhaps,” said the Knight: “but if they _do_ come, Idon’t choose to have them running all about.”“You see,” he went on after a pause, “it’s as well to be provided for_everything_. That’s the reason the horse has all those anklets roundhis feet.”“But what are they for?” Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.“To guard against the bites of sharks,” the Knight replied. “It’s aninvention of my own. And now help me on. I’ll go with you to the end ofthe wood—What’s the dish for?”“It’s meant for plum-cake,” said Alice.“We’d better take it with us,” the Knight said. “It’ll come in handy ifwe find any plum-cake. Help me to get it into this bag.”This took a very long time to manage, though Alice held the bag openvery carefully, because the Knight was so _very_ awkward in putting inthe dish: the first two or three times that he tried he fell in himselfinstead. “It’s rather a tight fit, you see,” he said, as they got it ina last; “There are so many candlesticks in the bag.” And he hung it tothe saddle, which was already loaded with bunches of carrots, andfire-irons, and many other things.“I hope you’ve got your hair well fastened on?” he continued, as theyset off.“Only in the usual way,” Alice said, smiling.“That’s hardly enough,” he said, anxiously. “You see the wind is so_very_ strong here. It’s as strong as soup.”“Have you invented a plan for keeping the hair from being blown off?”Alice enquired.“Not yet,” said the Knight. “But I’ve got a plan for keeping it from_falling_ off.”“I should like to hear it, very much.”“First you take an upright stick,” said the Knight. “Then you make yourhair creep up it, like a fruit-tree. Now the reason hair falls off isbecause it hangs _down_—things never fall _upwards_, you know. It’s aplan of my own invention. You may try it if you like.”It didn’t sound a comfortable plan, Alice thought, and for a fewminutes she walked on in silence, puzzling over the idea, and every nowand then stopping to help the poor Knight, who certainly was _not_ agood rider.Whenever the horse stopped (which it did very often), he fell off infront; and whenever it went on again (which it generally did rathersuddenly), he fell off behind. Otherwise he kept on pretty well, exceptthat he had a habit of now and then falling off sideways; and as hegenerally did this on the side on which Alice was walking, she soonfound that it was the best plan not to walk _quite_ close to the horse.“I’m afraid you’ve not had much practice in riding,” she ventured tosay, as she was helping him up from his fifth tumble.The Knight looked very much surprised, and a little offended at theremark. “What makes you say that?” he asked, as he scrambled back intothe saddle, keeping hold of Alice’s hair with one hand, to save himselffrom falling over on the other side.“Because people don’t fall off quite so often, when they’ve had muchpractice.”“I’ve had plenty of practice,” the Knight said very gravely: “plenty ofpractice!”Alice could think of nothing better to say than “Indeed?” but she saidit as heartily as she could. They went on a little way in silence afterthis, the Knight with his eyes shut, muttering to himself, and Alicewatching anxiously for the next tumble.“The great art of riding,” the Knight suddenly began in a loud voice,waving his right arm as he spoke, “is to keep—” Here the sentence endedas suddenly as it had begun, as the Knight fell heavily on the top ofhis head exactly in the path where Alice was walking. She was quitefrightened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as she picked himup, “I hope no bones are broken?”“None to speak of,” the Knight said, as if he didn’t mind breaking twoor three of them. “The great art of riding, as I was saying, is—to keepyour balance properly. Like this, you know—”He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to show Alicewhat he meant, and this time he fell flat on his back, right under thehorse’s feet.“Plenty of practice!” he went on repeating, all the time that Alice wasgetting him on his feet again. “Plenty of practice!”“It’s too ridiculous!” cried Alice, losing all her patience this time.“You ought to have a wooden horse on wheels, that you ought!”“Does that kind go smoothly?” the Knight asked in a tone of greatinterest, clasping his arms round the horse’s neck as he spoke, just intime to save himself from tumbling off again.“Much more smoothly than a live horse,” Alice said, with a littlescream of laughter, in spite of all she could do to prevent it.“I’ll get one,” the Knight said thoughtfully to himself. “One ortwo—several.”There was a short silence after this, and then the Knight went onagain. “I’m a great hand at inventing things. Now, I daresay younoticed, that last time you picked me up, that I was looking ratherthoughtful?”“You _were_ a little grave,” said Alice.“Well, just then I was inventing a new way of getting over a gate—wouldyou like to hear it?”“Very much indeed,” Alice said politely.“I’ll tell you how I came to think of it,” said the Knight. “You see, Isaid to myself, ‘The only difficulty is with the feet: the _head_ ishigh enough already.’ Now, first I put my head on the top of thegate—then I stand on my head—then the feet are high enough, yousee—then I’m over, you see.”“Yes, I suppose you’d be over when that was done,” Alice saidthoughtfully: “but don’t you think it would be rather hard?”“I haven’t tried it yet,” the Knight said, gravely: “so I can’t tellfor certain—but I’m afraid it _would_ be a little hard.”He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice changed the subject hastily.“What a curious helmet you’ve got!” she said cheerfully. “Is that yourinvention too?”The Knight looked down proudly at his helmet, which hung from thesaddle. “Yes,” he said, “but I’ve invented a better one than that—likea sugar loaf. When I used to wear it, if I fell off the horse, italways touched the ground directly. So I had a _very_ little way tofall, you see—But there _was_ the danger of falling _into_ it, to besure. That happened to me once—and the worst of it was, before I couldget out again, the other White Knight came and put it on. He thought itwas his own helmet.”The knight looked so solemn about it that Alice did not dare to laugh.“I’m afraid you must have hurt him,” she said in a trembling voice,“being on the top of his head.”“I had to kick him, of course,” the Knight said, very seriously. “Andthen he took the helmet off again—but it took hours and hours to get meout. I was as fast as—as lightning, you know.”“But that’s a different kind of fastness,” Alice objected.The Knight shook his head. “It was all kinds of fastness with me, I canassure you!” he said. He raised his hands in some excitement as he saidthis, and instantly rolled out of the saddle, and fell headlong into adeep ditch.Alice ran to the side of the ditch to look for him. She was ratherstartled by the fall, as for some time he had kept on very well, andshe was afraid that he really _was_ hurt this time. However, though shecould see nothing but the soles of his feet, she was much relieved tohear that he was talking on in his usual tone. “All kinds of fastness,”he repeated: “but it was careless of him to put another man’s helmeton—with the man in it, too.”“How _can_ you go on talking so quietly, head downwards?” Alice asked,as she dragged him out by the feet, and laid him in a heap on the bank.The Knight looked surprised at the question. “What does it matter wheremy body happens to be?” he said. “My mind goes on working all the same.In fact, the more head downwards I am, the more I keep inventing newthings.”“Now the cleverest thing of the sort that I ever did,” he went on aftera pause, “was inventing a new pudding during the meat-course.”“In time to have it cooked for the next course?” said Alice. “Well, notthe _next_ course,” the Knight said in a slow thoughtful tone: “no,certainly not the next _course_.”“Then it would have to be the next day. I suppose you wouldn’t have twopudding-courses in one dinner?”“Well, not the _next_ day,” the Knight repeated as before: “not thenext _day_. In fact,” he went on, holding his head down, and his voicegetting lower and lower, “I don’t believe that pudding ever _was_cooked! In fact, I don’t believe that pudding ever _will_ be cooked!And yet it was a very clever pudding to invent.”“What did you mean it to be made of?” Alice asked, hoping to cheer himup, for the poor Knight seemed quite low-spirited about it.“It began with blotting paper,” the Knight answered with a groan.“That wouldn’t be very nice, I’m afraid—”“Not very nice _alone_,” he interrupted, quite eagerly: “but you’ve noidea what a difference it makes mixing it with other things—such asgunpowder and sealing-wax. And here I must leave you.” They had justcome to the end of the wood.Alice could only look puzzled: she was thinking of the pudding.“You are sad,” the Knight said in an anxious tone: “let me sing you asong to comfort you.”“Is it very long?” Alice asked, for she had heard a good deal of poetrythat day.“It’s long,” said the Knight, “but very, _very_ beautiful. Everybodythat hears me sing it—either it brings the _tears_ into their eyes, orelse—”“Or else what?” said Alice, for the Knight had made a sudden pause.“Or else it doesn’t, you know. The name of the song is called‘_Haddocks’ Eyes_.’”“Oh, that’s the name of the song, is it?” Alice said, trying to feelinterested.“No, you don’t understand,” the Knight said, looking a little vexed.“That’s what the name is _called_. The name really _is_ ‘_The Aged AgedMan_.’”“Then I ought to have said ‘That’s what the _song_ is called’?” Alicecorrected herself.“No, you oughtn’t: that’s quite another thing! The _song_ is called‘_Ways and Means_’: but that’s only what it’s _called_, you know!”“Well, what _is_ the song, then?” said Alice, who was by this timecompletely bewildered.“I was coming to that,” the Knight said. “The song really _is_‘_A-sitting On A Gate_’: and the tune’s my own invention.”So saying, he stopped his horse and let the reins fall on its neck:then, slowly beating time with one hand, and with a faint smilelighting up his gentle foolish face, as if he enjoyed the music of hissong, he began.Of all the strange things that Alice saw in her journey Through TheLooking-Glass, this was the one that she always remembered mostclearly. Years afterwards she could bring the whole scene back again,as if it had been only yesterday—the mild blue eyes and kindly smile ofthe Knight—the setting sun gleaming through his hair, and shining onhis armour in a blaze of light that quite dazzled her—the horse quietlymoving about, with the reins hanging loose on his neck, cropping thegrass at her feet—and the black shadows of the forest behind—all thisshe took in like a picture, as, with one hand shading her eyes, sheleant against a tree, watching the strange pair, and listening, in ahalf dream, to the melancholy music of the song.“But the tune _isn’t_ his own invention,” she said to herself: “it’s‘_I give thee all, I can no more_.’” She stood and listened veryattentively, but no tears came into her eyes.“I’ll tell thee everything I can;There’s little to relate.I saw an aged aged man,A-sitting on a gate.‘Who are you, aged man?’ I said,‘and how is it you live?’And his answer trickled through my headLike water through a sieve.He said ‘I look for butterfliesThat sleep among the wheat:I make them into mutton-pies,And sell them in the street.I sell them unto men,’ he said,‘Who sail on stormy seas;And that’s the way I get my bread—A trifle, if you please.’But I was thinking of a planTo dye one’s whiskers green,And always use so large a fanThat they could not be seen.So, having no reply to giveTo what the old man said,I cried, ‘Come, tell me how you live!’And thumped him on the head.His accents mild took up the tale:He said ‘I go my ways,And when I find a mountain-rill,I set it in a blaze;And thence they make a stuff they callRolands’ Macassar Oil—Yet twopence-halfpenny is allThey give me for my toil.’But I was thinking of a wayTo feed oneself on batter,And so go on from day to dayGetting a little fatter.I shook him well from side to side,Until his face was blue:‘Come, tell me how you live,’ I cried,‘And what it is you do!’He said ‘I hunt for haddocks’ eyesAmong the heather bright,And work them into waistcoat-buttonsIn the silent night.And these I do not sell for goldOr coin of silvery shineBut for a copper halfpenny,And that will purchase nine.‘I sometimes dig for buttered rolls,Or set limed twigs for crabs;I sometimes search the grassy knollsFor wheels of Hansom-cabs.And that’s the way’ (he gave a wink)‘By which I get my wealth—And very gladly will I drinkYour Honour’s noble health.’I heard him then, for I had justCompleted my designTo keep the Menai bridge from rustBy boiling it in wine.I thanked him much for telling meThe way he got his wealth,But chiefly for his wish that heMight drink my noble health.And now, if e’er by chance I putMy fingers into glueOr madly squeeze a right-hand footInto a left-hand shoe,Or if I drop upon my toeA very heavy weight,I weep, for it reminds me so,Of that old man I used to know—Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow,Whose hair was whiter than the snow,Whose face was very like a crow,With eyes, like cinders, all aglow,Who seemed distracted with his woe,Who rocked his body to and fro,And muttered mumblingly and low,As if his mouth were full of dough,Who snorted like a buffalo—That summer evening, long ago,A-sitting on a gate.”As the Knight sang the last words of the ballad, he gathered up thereins, and turned his horse’s head along the road by which they hadcome. “You’ve only a few yards to go,” he said, “down the hill and overthat little brook, and then you’ll be a Queen—But you’ll stay and seeme off first?” he added as Alice turned with an eager look in thedirection to which he pointed. “I shan’t be long. You’ll wait and waveyour handkerchief when I get to that turn in the road? I think it’llencourage me, you see.”“Of course I’ll wait,” said Alice: “and thank you very much for comingso far—and for the song—I liked it very much.”“I hope so,” the Knight said doubtfully: “but you didn’t cry so much asI thought you would.”So they shook hands, and then the Knight rode slowly away into theforest. “It won’t take long to see him _off_, I expect,” Alice said toherself, as she stood watching him. “There he goes! Right on his headas usual! However, he gets on again pretty easily—that comes of havingso many things hung round the horse—” So she went on talking toherself, as she watched the horse walking leisurely along the road, andthe Knight tumbling off, first on one side and then on the other. Afterthe fourth or fifth tumble he reached the turn, and then she waved herhandkerchief to him, and waited till he was out of sight.“I hope it encouraged him,” she said, as she turned to run down thehill: “and now for the last brook, and to be a Queen! How grand itsounds!” A very few steps brought her to the edge of the brook. “TheEighth Square at last!” she cried as she bounded across,*      *      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      **      *      *      *      *      *      *and threw herself down to rest on a lawn as soft as moss, with littleflower-beds dotted about it here and there. “Oh, how glad I am to gethere! And what _is_ this on my head?” she exclaimed in a tone ofdismay, as she put her hands up to something very heavy, and fittedtight all round her head.“But how _can_ it have got there without my knowing it?” she said toherself, as she lifted it off, and set it on her lap to make out whatit could possibly be.It was a golden crown.CHAPTER IX.Queen Alice“Well, this _is_ grand!” said Alice. “I never expected I should be aQueen so soon—and I’ll tell you what it is, your majesty,” she went onin a severe tone (she was always rather fond of scolding herself),“it’ll never do for you to be lolling about on the grass like that!Queens have to be dignified, you know!”So she got up and walked about—rather stiffly just at first, as she wasafraid that the crown might come off: but she comforted herself withthe thought that there was nobody to see her, “and if I really am aQueen,” she said as she sat down again, “I shall be able to manage itquite well in time.”Everything was happening so oddly that she didn’t feel a bit surprisedat finding the Red Queen and the White Queen sitting close to her, oneon each side: she would have liked very much to ask them how they camethere, but she feared it would not be quite civil. However, there wouldbe no harm, she thought, in asking if the game was over. “Please, wouldyou tell me—” she began, looking timidly at the Red Queen.“Speak when you’re spoken to!” The Queen sharply interrupted her.“But if everybody obeyed that rule,” said Alice, who was always readyfor a little argument, “and if you only spoke when you were spoken to,and the other person always waited for _you_ to begin, you see nobodywould ever say anything, so that—”“Ridiculous!” cried the Queen. “Why, don’t you see, child—” here shebroke off with a frown, and, after thinking for a minute, suddenlychanged the subject of the conversation. “What do you mean by ‘If youreally are a Queen’? What right have you to call yourself so? You can’tbe a Queen, you know, till you’ve passed the proper examination. Andthe sooner we begin it, the better.”“I only said ‘if’!” poor Alice pleaded in a piteous tone.The two Queens looked at each other, and the Red Queen remarked, with alittle shudder, “She _says_ she only said ‘if’—”“But she said a great deal more than that!” the White Queen moaned,wringing her hands. “Oh, ever so much more than that!”“So you did, you know,” the Red Queen said to Alice. “Always speak thetruth—think before you speak—and write it down afterwards.”“I’m sure I didn’t mean—” Alice was beginning, but the Red Queeninterrupted her impatiently.“That’s just what I complain of! You _should_ have meant! What do yousuppose is the use of child without any meaning? Even a joke shouldhave some meaning—and a child’s more important than a joke, I hope. Youcouldn’t deny that, even if you tried with both hands.”“I don’t deny things with my _hands_,” Alice objected.“Nobody said you did,” said the Red Queen. “I said you couldn’t if youtried.”“She’s in that state of mind,” said the White Queen, “that she wants todeny _something_—only she doesn’t know what to deny!”“A nasty, vicious temper,” the Red Queen remarked; and then there wasan uncomfortable silence for a minute or two.The Red Queen broke the silence by saying to the White Queen, “I inviteyou to Alice’s dinner-party this afternoon.”The White Queen smiled feebly, and said “And I invite _you_.”“I didn’t know I was to have a party at all,” said Alice; “but if thereis to be one, I think _I_ ought to invite the guests.”“We gave you the opportunity of doing it,” the Red Queen remarked: “butI daresay you’ve not had many lessons in manners yet?”“Manners are not taught in lessons,” said Alice. “Lessons teach you todo sums, and things of that sort.”“And you do Addition?” the White Queen asked. “What’s one and one andone and one and one and one and one and one and one and one?”“I don’t know,” said Alice. “I lost count.”“She can’t do Addition,” the Red Queen interrupted. “Can you doSubtraction? Take nine from eight.”“Nine from eight I can’t, you know,” Alice replied very readily: “but—”“She can’t do Subtraction,” said the White Queen. “Can you do Division?Divide a loaf by a knife—what’s the answer to that?”“I suppose—” Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen answered for her.“Bread-and-butter, of course. Try another Subtraction sum. Take a bonefrom a dog: what remains?”Alice considered. “The bone wouldn’t remain, of course, if I tookit—and the dog wouldn’t remain; it would come to bite me—and I’m sure_I_ shouldn’t remain!”“Then you think nothing would remain?” said the Red Queen.“I think that’s the answer.”“Wrong, as usual,” said the Red Queen: “the dog’s temper would remain.”“But I don’t see how—”“Why, look here!” the Red Queen cried. “The dog would lose its temper,wouldn’t it?”“Perhaps it would,” Alice replied cautiously.“Then if the dog went away, its temper would remain!” the Queenexclaimed triumphantly.Alice said, as gravely as she could, “They might go different ways.”But she couldn’t help thinking to herself, “What dreadful nonsense we_are_ talking!”“She can’t do sums a _bit_!” the Queens said together, with greatemphasis.“Can _you_ do sums?” Alice said, turning suddenly on the White Queen,for she didn’t like being found fault with so much.The Queen gasped and shut her eyes. “I can do Addition, if you give metime—but I can’t do Subtraction, under _any_ circumstances!”“Of course you know your A B C?” said the Red Queen.“To be sure I do.” said Alice.“So do I,” the White Queen whispered: “we’ll often say it overtogether, dear. And I’ll tell you a secret—I can read words of oneletter! Isn’t _that_ grand! However, don’t be discouraged. You’ll cometo it in time.”Here the Red Queen began again. “Can you answer useful questions?” shesaid. “How is bread made?”“I know _that_!” Alice cried eagerly. “You take some flour—”“Where do you pick the flower?” the White Queen asked. “In a garden, orin the hedges?”“Well, it isn’t _picked_ at all,” Alice explained: “it’s _ground_—”“How many acres of ground?” said the White Queen. “You mustn’t leaveout so many things.”“Fan her head!” the Red Queen anxiously interrupted. “She’ll befeverish after so much thinking.” So they set to work and fanned herwith bunches of leaves, till she had to beg them to leave off, it blewher hair about so.“She’s all right again now,” said the Red Queen. “Do you knowLanguages? What’s the French for fiddle-de-dee?”“Fiddle-de-dee’s not English,” Alice replied gravely.“Who ever said it was?” said the Red Queen.Alice thought she saw a way out of the difficulty this time. “If you’lltell me what language ‘fiddle-de-dee’ is, I’ll tell you the French forit!” she exclaimed triumphantly.But the Red Queen drew herself up rather stiffly, and said “Queensnever make bargains.”“I wish Queens never asked questions,” Alice thought to herself.“Don’t let us quarrel,” the White Queen said in an anxious tone. “Whatis the cause of lightning?”“The cause of lightning,” Alice said very decidedly, for she felt quitecertain about this, “is the thunder—no, no!” she hastily correctedherself. “I meant the other way.”“It’s too late to correct it,” said the Red Queen: “when you’ve oncesaid a thing, that fixes it, and you must take the consequences.”“Which reminds me—” the White Queen said, looking down and nervouslyclasping and unclasping her hands, “we had _such_ a thunderstorm lastTuesday—I mean one of the last set of Tuesdays, you know.”Alice was puzzled. “In _our_ country,” she remarked, “there’s only oneday at a time.”The Red Queen said, “That’s a poor thin way of doing things. Now_here_, we mostly have days and nights two or three at a time, andsometimes in the winter we take as many as five nights together—forwarmth, you know.”“Are five nights warmer than one night, then?” Alice ventured to ask.“Five times as warm, of course.”“But they should be five times as _cold_, by the same rule—”“Just so!” cried the Red Queen. “Five times as warm, _and_ five timesas cold—just as I’m five times as rich as you are, _and_ five times asclever!”Alice sighed and gave it up. “It’s exactly like a riddle with noanswer!” she thought.“Humpty Dumpty saw it too,” the White Queen went on in a low voice,more as if she were talking to herself. “He came to the door with acorkscrew in his hand—”“What did he want?” said the Red Queen.“He said he _would_ come in,” the White Queen went on, “because he waslooking for a hippopotamus. Now, as it happened, there wasn’t such athing in the house, that morning.”“Is there generally?” Alice asked in an astonished tone.“Well, only on Thursdays,” said the Queen.“I know what he came for,” said Alice: “he wanted to punish the fish,because—”Here the White Queen began again. “It was _such_ a thunderstorm, youcan’t think!” (“She _never_ could, you know,” said the Red Queen.) “Andpart of the roof came off, and ever so much thunder got in—and it wentrolling round the room in great lumps—and knocking over the tables andthings—till I was so frightened, I couldn’t remember my own name!”Alice thought to herself, “I never should _try_ to remember my name inthe middle of an accident! Where would be the use of it?” but she didnot say this aloud, for fear of hurting the poor Queen’s feeling.“Your Majesty must excuse her,” the Red Queen said to Alice, taking oneof the White Queen’s hands in her own, and gently stroking it: “shemeans well, but she can’t help saying foolish things, as a generalrule.”The White Queen looked timidly at Alice, who felt she _ought_ to saysomething kind, but really couldn’t think of anything at the moment.“She never was really well brought up,” the Red Queen went on: “butit’s amazing how good-tempered she is! Pat her on the head, and see howpleased she’ll be!” But this was more than Alice had courage to do.“A little kindness—and putting her hair in papers—would do wonders withher—”The White Queen gave a deep sigh, and laid her head on Alice’sshoulder. “I _am_ so sleepy?” she moaned.“She’s tired, poor thing!” said the Red Queen. “Smooth her hair—lendher your nightcap—and sing her a soothing lullaby.”“I haven’t got a nightcap with me,” said Alice, as she tried to obeythe first direction: “and I don’t know any soothing lullabies.”“I must do it myself, then,” said the Red Queen, and she began:“Hush-a-by lady, in Alice’s lap!Till the feast’s ready, we’ve time for a nap:When the feast’s over, we’ll go to the ball—Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all!“And now you know the words,” she added, as she put her head down onAlice’s other shoulder, “just sing it through to _me_. I’m gettingsleepy, too.” In another moment both Queens were fast asleep, andsnoring loud.“What _am_ I to do?” exclaimed Alice, looking about in greatperplexity, as first one round head, and then the other, rolled downfrom her shoulder, and lay like a heavy lump in her lap. “I don’t thinkit _ever_ happened before, that any one had to take care of two Queensasleep at once! No, not in all the History of England—it couldn’t, youknow, because there never was more than one Queen at a time. Do wakeup, you heavy things!” she went on in an impatient tone; but there wasno answer but a gentle snoring.The snoring got more distinct every minute, and sounded more like atune: at last she could even make out the words, and she listened soeagerly that, when the two great heads vanished from her lap, shehardly missed them.She was standing before an arched doorway over which were the wordsQUEEN ALICE in large letters, and on each side of the arch there was abell-handle; one was marked “Visitors’ Bell,” and the other “Servants’Bell.”“I’ll wait till the song’s over,” thought Alice, “and then I’llring—the—_which_ bell must I ring?” she went on, very much puzzled bythe names. “I’m not a visitor, and I’m not a servant. There _ought_ tobe one marked ‘Queen,’ you know—”Just then the door opened a little way, and a creature with a long beakput its head out for a moment and said “No admittance till the weekafter next!” and shut the door again with a bang.Alice knocked and rang in vain for a long time, but at last, a very oldFrog, who was sitting under a tree, got up and hobbled slowly towardsher: he was dressed in bright yellow, and had enormous boots on.“What is it, now?” the Frog said in a deep hoarse whisper.Alice turned round, ready to find fault with anybody. “Where’s theservant whose business it is to answer the door?” she began angrily.“Which door?” said the Frog.Alice almost stamped with irritation at the slow drawl in which hespoke. “_This_ door, of course!”The Frog looked at the door with his large dull eyes for a minute: thenhe went nearer and rubbed it with his thumb, as if he were tryingwhether the paint would come off; then he looked at Alice.“To answer the door?” he said. “What’s it been asking of?” He was sohoarse that Alice could scarcely hear him.“I don’t know what you mean,” she said.“I talks English, doesn’t I?” the Frog went on. “Or are you deaf? Whatdid it ask you?”“Nothing!” Alice said impatiently. “I’ve been knocking at it!”“Shouldn’t do that—shouldn’t do that—” the Frog muttered. “Vexes it,you know.” Then he went up and gave the door a kick with one of hisgreat feet. “You let _it_ alone,” he panted out, as he hobbled back tohis tree, “and it’ll let _you_ alone, you know.”At this moment the door was flung open, and a shrill voice was heardsinging:“To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said,‘I’ve a sceptre in hand, I’ve a crown on my head;Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be,Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me.’”And hundreds of voices joined in the chorus:“Then fill up the glasses as quick as you can,And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran:Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea—And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three!”Then followed a confused noise of cheering, and Alice thought toherself, “Thirty times three makes ninety. I wonder if any one’scounting?” In a minute there was silence again, and the same shrillvoice sang another verse;“‘O Looking-Glass creatures,’ quoth Alice, ‘draw near!“Tis an honour to see me, a favour to hear:“Tis a privilege high to have dinner and teaAlong with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!’”Then came the chorus again:—“Then fill up the glasses with treacle and ink,Or anything else that is pleasant to drink:Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine—And welcome Queen Alice with ninety-times-nine!”“Ninety times nine!” Alice repeated in despair, “Oh, that’ll never bedone! I’d better go in at once—” and there was a dead silence themoment she appeared.Alice glanced nervously along the table, as she walked up the largehall, and noticed that there were about fifty guests, of all kinds:some were animals, some birds, and there were even a few flowers amongthem. “I’m glad they’ve come without waiting to be asked,” she thought:“I should never have known who were the right people to invite!”There were three chairs at the head of the table; the Red and WhiteQueens had already taken two of them, but the middle one was empty.Alice sat down in it, rather uncomfortable in the silence, and longingfor some one to speak.At last the Red Queen began. “You’ve missed the soup and fish,” shesaid. “Put on the joint!” And the waiters set a leg of mutton beforeAlice, who looked at it rather anxiously, as she had never had to carvea joint before.“You look a little shy; let me introduce you to that leg of mutton,”said the Red Queen. “Alice—Mutton; Mutton—Alice.” The leg of mutton gotup in the dish and made a little bow to Alice; and Alice returned thebow, not knowing whether to be frightened or amused.“May I give you a slice?” she said, taking up the knife and fork, andlooking from one Queen to the other.“Certainly not,” the Red Queen said, very decidedly: “it isn’tetiquette to cut any one you’ve been introduced to. Remove the joint!”And the waiters carried it off, and brought a large plum-pudding in itsplace.“I won’t be introduced to the pudding, please,” Alice said ratherhastily, “or we shall get no dinner at all. May I give you some?”But the Red Queen looked sulky, and growled “Pudding—Alice;Alice—Pudding. Remove the pudding!” and the waiters took it away soquickly that Alice couldn’t return its bow.However, she didn’t see why the Red Queen should be the only one togive orders, so, as an experiment, she called out “Waiter! Bring backthe pudding!” and there it was again in a moment like aconjuring-trick. It was so large that she couldn’t help feeling a_little_ shy with it, as she had been with the mutton; however, sheconquered her shyness by a great effort and cut a slice and handed itto the Red Queen.“What impertinence!” said the Pudding. “I wonder how you’d like it, ifI were to cut a slice out of _you_, you creature!”It spoke in a thick, suety sort of voice, and Alice hadn’t a word tosay in reply: she could only sit and look at it and gasp.“Make a remark,” said the Red Queen: “it’s ridiculous to leave all theconversation to the pudding!”“Do you know, I’ve had such a quantity of poetry repeated to meto-day,” Alice began, a little frightened at finding that, the momentshe opened her lips, there was dead silence, and all eyes were fixedupon her; “and it’s a very curious thing, I think—every poem was aboutfishes in some way. Do you know why they’re so fond of fishes, allabout here?”She spoke to the Red Queen, whose answer was a little wide of the mark.“As to fishes,” she said, very slowly and solemnly, putting her mouthclose to Alice’s ear, “her White Majesty knows a lovely riddle—all inpoetry—all about fishes. Shall she repeat it?”“Her Red Majesty’s very kind to mention it,” the White Queen murmuredinto Alice’s other ear, in a voice like the cooing of a pigeon. “Itwould be _such_ a treat! May I?”“Please do,” Alice said very politely.The White Queen laughed with delight, and stroked Alice’s cheek. Thenshe began:“‘First, the fish must be caught.’That is easy: a baby, I think, could have caught it.‘Next, the fish must be bought.’That is easy: a penny, I think, would have bought it.‘Now cook me the fish!’That is easy, and will not take more than a minute.‘Let it lie in a dish!’That is easy, because it already is in it.‘Bring it here! Let me sup!’It is easy to set such a dish on the table.‘Take the dish-cover up!’Ah, that is so hard that I fear I’m unable!For it holds it like glue—Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle:Which is easiest to do,Un-dish-cover the fish, or dishcover the riddle?”“Take a minute to think about it, and then guess,” said the Red Queen.“Meanwhile, we’ll drink your health—Queen Alice’s health!” she screamedat the top of her voice, and all the guests began drinking it directly,and very queerly they managed it: some of them put their glasses upontheir heads like extinguishers, and drank all that trickled down theirfaces—others upset the decanters, and drank the wine as it ran off theedges of the table—and three of them (who looked like kangaroos)scrambled into the dish of roast mutton, and began eagerly lapping upthe gravy, “just like pigs in a trough!” thought Alice.“You ought to return thanks in a neat speech,” the Red Queen said,frowning at Alice as she spoke.“We must support you, you know,” the White Queen whispered, as Alicegot up to do it, very obediently, but a little frightened.“Thank you very much,” she whispered in reply, “but I can do quite wellwithout.”“That wouldn’t be at all the thing,” the Red Queen said very decidedly:so Alice tried to submit to it with a good grace.(“And they _did_ push so!” she said afterwards, when she was tellingher sister the history of the feast. “You would have thought theywanted to squeeze me flat!”)In fact it was rather difficult for her to keep in her place while shemade her speech: the two Queens pushed her so, one on each side, thatthey nearly lifted her up into the air: “I rise to return thanks—”Alice began: and she really _did_ rise as she spoke, several inches;but she got hold of the edge of the table, and managed to pull herselfdown again.“Take care of yourself!” screamed the White Queen, seizing Alice’s hairwith both her hands. “Something’s going to happen!”And then (as Alice afterwards described it) all sorts of thingshappened in a moment. The candles all grew up to the ceiling, lookingsomething like a bed of rushes with fireworks at the top. As to thebottles, they each took a pair of plates, which they hastily fitted onas wings, and so, with forks for legs, went fluttering about in alldirections: “and very like birds they look,” Alice thought to herself,as well as she could in the dreadful confusion that was beginning.At this moment she heard a hoarse laugh at her side, and turned to seewhat was the matter with the White Queen; but, instead of the Queen,there was the leg of mutton sitting in the chair. “Here I am!” cried avoice from the soup tureen, and Alice turned again, just in time to seethe Queen’s broad good-natured face grinning at her for a moment overthe edge of the tureen, before she disappeared into the soup.There was not a moment to be lost. Already several of the guests werelying down in the dishes, and the soup ladle was walking up the tabletowards Alice’s chair, and beckoning to her impatiently to get out ofits way.“I can’t stand this any longer!” she cried as she jumped up and seizedthe table-cloth with both hands: one good pull, and plates, dishes,guests, and candles came crashing down together in a heap on the floor.“And as for _you_,” she went on, turning fiercely upon the Red Queen,whom she considered as the cause of all the mischief—but the Queen wasno longer at her side—she had suddenly dwindled down to the size of alittle doll, and was now on the table, merrily running round and roundafter her own shawl, which was trailing behind her.At any other time, Alice would have felt surprised at this, but she wasfar too much excited to be surprised at anything _now_. “As for _you_,”she repeated, catching hold of the little creature in the very act ofjumping over a bottle which had just lighted upon the table, “I’llshake you into a kitten, that I will!”CHAPTER X.ShakingShe took her off the table as she spoke, and shook her backwards andforwards with all her might.The Red Queen made no resistance whatever; only her face grew verysmall, and her eyes got large and green: and still, as Alice went onshaking her, she kept on growing shorter—and fatter—and softer—androunder—and—CHAPTER XI.Waking—and it really _was_ a kitten, after all.CHAPTER XII.Which Dreamed it?“Your majesty shouldn’t purr so loud,” Alice said, rubbing her eyes,and addressing the kitten, respectfully, yet with some severity. “Youwoke me out of oh! such a nice dream! And you’ve been along with me,Kitty—all through the Looking-Glass world. Did you know it, dear?”It is a very inconvenient habit of kittens (Alice had once made theremark) that, whatever you say to them, they _always_ purr. “If theywould only purr for ‘yes’ and mew for ‘no,’ or any rule of that sort,”she had said, “so that one could keep up a conversation! But how _can_you talk with a person if they always say the same thing?”On this occasion the kitten only purred: and it was impossible to guesswhether it meant “yes” or “no.”So Alice hunted among the chessmen on the table till she had found theRed Queen: then she went down on her knees on the hearth-rug, and putthe kitten and the Queen to look at each other. “Now, Kitty!” shecried, clapping her hands triumphantly. “Confess that was what youturned into!”(“But it wouldn’t look at it,” she said, when she was explaining thething afterwards to her sister: “it turned away its head, and pretendednot to see it: but it looked a _little_ ashamed of itself, so I thinkit _must_ have been the Red Queen.”)“Sit up a little more stiffly, dear!” Alice cried with a merry laugh.“And curtsey while you’re thinking what to—what to purr. It saves time,remember!” And she caught it up and gave it one little kiss, “just inhonour of having been a Red Queen.”“Snowdrop, my pet!” she went on, looking over her shoulder at the WhiteKitten, which was still patiently undergoing its toilet, “when _will_Dinah have finished with your White Majesty, I wonder? That must be thereason you were so untidy in my dream—Dinah! do you know that you’rescrubbing a White Queen? Really, it’s most disrespectful of you!“And what did _Dinah_ turn to, I wonder?” she prattled on, as shesettled comfortably down, with one elbow in the rug, and her chin inher hand, to watch the kittens. “Tell me, Dinah, did you turn to HumptyDumpty? I _think_ you did—however, you’d better not mention it to yourfriends just yet, for I’m not sure.“By the way, Kitty, if only you’d been really with me in my dream,there was one thing you _would_ have enjoyed—I had such a quantity ofpoetry said to me, all about fishes! To-morrow morning you shall have areal treat. All the time you’re eating your breakfast, I’ll repeat ‘TheWalrus and the Carpenter’ to you; and then you can make believe it’soysters, dear!“Now, Kitty, let’s consider who it was that dreamed it all. This is aserious question, my dear, and you should _not_ go on licking your pawlike that—as if Dinah hadn’t washed you this morning! You see, Kitty,it _must_ have been either me or the Red King. He was part of my dream,of course—but then I was part of his dream, too! _Was_ it the Red King,Kitty? You were his wife, my dear, so you ought to know—Oh, Kitty, _do_help to settle it! I’m sure your paw can wait!” But the provokingkitten only began on the other paw, and pretended it hadn’t heard thequestion.Which do _you_ think it was?A boat beneath a sunny sky,Lingering onward dreamilyIn an evening of July—Children three that nestle near,Eager eye and willing ear,Pleased a simple tale to hear—Long has paled that sunny sky:Echoes fade and memories die.Autumn frosts have slain July.Still she haunts me, phantomwise,Alice moving under skiesNever seen by waking eyes.Children yet, the tale to hear,Eager eye and willing ear,Lovingly shall nestle near.In a Wonderland they lie,Dreaming as the days go by,Dreaming as the summers die:Ever drifting down the stream—Lingering in the golden gleam—Life, what is it but a dream?THE END*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS ******** This file should be named 12-0.txt or 12-0.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:https://www.gutenberg.org/1/12/Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in theUnited States without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tmconcept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from theperson or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph1.E.8.1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("theFoundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tmworks in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any workon which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States andmost other parts of the world at no cost and with almost norestrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use itunder the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with thiseBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in theUnited States, you will have to check the laws of the country whereyou are located before using this eBook.1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tmtrademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a formatother than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "PlainVanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksprovided that:* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive fromthe use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the methodyou already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owedto the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he hasagreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paidwithin 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or arelegally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royaltypayments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified inSection 4, "Information about donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation."* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifiesyou in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/hedoes not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense. You must require such a user to return or destroy allcopies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinueall use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tmworks.* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund ofany money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in theelectronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days ofreceipt of the work.* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for freedistribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tmProject Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page atwww.gutenberg.orgSection 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state's laws.The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation's websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive withoutwidespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particularstate visit www.gutenberg.org/donateWhile we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.orgThis website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-----
